  RFC 8671        BMP Adj-RIB-Out   November 2019
  --------------- ----------------- ---------------
  Evens, et al.   Standards Track   \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8671](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8671){.eref}

Updates:
:   [7854](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7854){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   November 2019

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    T. Evens
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Bayraktar
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    P. Lucente
    :::

    ::: org
    NTT Communications
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    P. Mi
    :::

    ::: org
    Tencent
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Zhuang
    :::

    ::: org
    Huawei
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8671 {#rfcnum}

# Support for Adj-RIB-Out in the BGP Monitoring Protocol (BMP) {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

The BGP Monitoring Protocol (BMP) only defines access to the Adj-RIB-In
Routing Information Bases (RIBs). This document updates BMP (RFC 7854)
by adding access to the Adj-RIB-Out RIBs. It also adds a new flag to the
peer header to distinguish between Adj-RIB-In and
Adj-RIB-Out.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8671>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-boilerplate.3 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Definitions](#name-definitions){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Per-Peer
    Header](#name-per-peer-header){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Adj-RIB-Out](#name-adj-rib-out){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.5.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [Post-policy](#name-post-policy){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.5.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [Pre-policy](#name-pre-policy){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.5.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [BMP
    Messages](#name-bmp-messages){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.6.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.6.2.1}
        [6.1](#section-6.1){.xref}.  [Route Monitoring and Route
        Mirroring](#name-route-monitoring-and-route-){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.6.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.6.2.2}
        [6.2](#section-6.2){.xref}.  [Statistics
        Report](#name-statistics-report){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.6.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.6.2.3}
        [6.3](#section-6.3){.xref}.  [Peer Up and Down
        Notifications](#name-peer-up-and-down-notificati){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.6.2.3.1){.pilcrow}

        -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.6.2.3.2.1}
            [6.3.1](#section-6.3.1){.xref}.  [Peer Up
            Information](#name-peer-up-information){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.6.2.3.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
            :::
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Other
    Considerations](#name-other-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.7.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.xref}.  [Peer and Update
        Groups](#name-peer-and-update-groups){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.7.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.7.2.2}
        [7.2](#section-7.2){.xref}.  [Changes to Existing BMP
        Session](#name-changes-to-existing-bmp-ses){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.7.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.9.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.9.2.1}
        [9.1](#section-9.1){.xref}.  [Addition to BMP Peer Flags
        Registry](#name-addition-to-bmp-peer-flags-){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.9.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.9.2.2}
        [9.2](#section-9.2){.xref}.  [Additions to BMP Statistics Types
        Registry](#name-additions-to-bmp-statistics){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.9.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.9.2.3}
        [9.3](#section-9.3){.xref}.  [Addition to BMP Initiation Message
        TLVs
        Registry](#name-addition-to-bmp-initiation-){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.9.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [Normative
    References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.11}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.12}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Contributors](#name-contributors){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.12.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-boilerplate.3-1.13}
    [](#section-appendix.c){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-boilerplate.3-1.13.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#Introduction}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

The BGP Monitoring Protocol (BMP) defines monitoring of the received
(e.g., Adj-RIB-In) Routing Information Bases (RIBs) per peer. The
pre-policy Adj-RIB-In conveys to a BMP receiver all RIB data before any
policy has been applied. The post-policy Adj-RIB-In conveys to a BMP
receiver all RIB data after policy filters and/or modifications have
been applied. An example of pre-policy versus post-policy is when an
inbound policy applies attribute modification or filters. Pre-policy
would contain information prior to the inbound policy changes or filters
of data. Post-policy would convey the changed data or would not contain
the filtered data.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

Monitoring the received updates that the router received before any
policy has been applied is the primary level of monitoring for most use
cases. Inbound policy validation and auditing are the primary use cases
for enabling post-policy monitoring.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

In order for a BMP receiver to receive any BGP data, the BMP sender
(e.g., router) needs to have an established BGP peering session and
actively be receiving updates for an
Adj-RIB-In.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Being able to only monitor the Adj-RIB-In puts a restriction on what
data is available to BMP receivers via BMP senders (e.g., routers). This
is an issue when the receiving end of the BGP peer is not enabled for
BMP or when it is not accessible for administrative reasons. For
example, a service provider advertises prefixes to a customer, but the
service provider cannot see what it advertises via BMP. Asking the
customer to enable BMP and monitoring of the Adj-RIB-In are not
feasible.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

BMP \[[RFC7854](#RFC7854){.xref}\] only defines Adj-RIB-In being sent to
BMP receivers. This document updates the per-peer header defined in
[Section
4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7854#section-4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC7854](#RFC7854){.xref}\] by adding a new flag to distinguish
between Adj-RIB-In and Adj-RIB-Out. BMP senders use the new flag to send
either Adj-RIB-In or Adj-RIB-Out.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

Adding Adj-RIB-Out provides the ability for a BMP sender to send to BMP
receivers what it advertises to BGP peers, which can be used for
outbound policy validation and to monitor routes that were
advertised.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Definitions](#name-definitions){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-definitions}

Adj-RIB-Out
:   As defined in \[[RFC4271](#RFC4271){.xref}\], \"The Adj-RIBs-Out
    contains the routes for advertisement to specific peers by means of
    the local speaker\'s UPDATE messages.\"[¶](#section-3-1.2){.pilcrow}

Pre-policy Adj-RIB-Out
:   The result before applying the outbound policy to an Adj-RIB-Out.
    This normally would match what is in the local
    RIB.[¶](#section-3-1.4){.pilcrow}

Post-policy Adj-RIB-Out
:   The result of applying outbound policy to an Adj-RIB-Out. This
    [MUST]{.bcp14} convey to the BMP receiver what is actually
    transmitted to the peer.[¶](#section-3-1.6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#PeerFlags}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Per-Peer Header](#name-per-peer-header){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-per-peer-header}

The per-peer header has the same structure and flags as defined in
[Section
4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7854#section-4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC7854](#RFC7854){.xref}\] with the addition of the O flag as shown
here:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4-2 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |V|L|A|O| Resv  |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}
:::

-   [The O flag indicates Adj-RIB-In if set to 0 and Adj-RIB-Out if set
    to 1.[¶](#section-4-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-3.1}

The existing flags are defined in [Section
4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7854#section-4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC7854](#RFC7854){.xref}\], and the remaining bits are reserved for
future use. They [MUST]{.bcp14} be transmitted as 0, and their values
[MUST]{.bcp14} be ignored on receipt.[¶](#section-4-4){.pilcrow}

When the O flag is set to 1, the following fields in the per-peer header
are redefined:[¶](#section-4-5){.pilcrow}

-   [Peer Address: The remote IP address associated with the TCP session
    over which the encapsulated Protocol Data Unit (PDU) is
    sent.[¶](#section-4-6.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-6.1}
-   [Peer AS: The Autonomous System number of the peer to which the
    encapsulated PDU is
    sent.[¶](#section-4-6.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-6.2}
-   [Peer BGP ID: The BGP Identifier of the peer to which the
    encapsulated PDU is
    sent.[¶](#section-4-6.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-6.3}
-   [Timestamp: The time when the encapsulated routes were advertised
    (one may also think of this as the time when they were installed in
    the Adj-RIB-Out), expressed in seconds and microseconds since
    midnight (zero hour), January 1, 1970 (UTC). If zero, the time is
    unavailable. Precision of the timestamp is
    implementation-dependent.[¶](#section-4-6.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-6.4}
:::
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Adj-RIB-Out](#name-adj-rib-out){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-adj-rib-out}

::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Post-policy](#name-post-policy){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-post-policy}

The primary use case in monitoring Adj-RIB-Out is to monitor the updates
transmitted to a BGP peer after outbound policy has been applied. These
updates reflect the result after modifications and filters have been
applied (e.g., post-policy Adj-RIB-Out). Some attributes are set when
the BGP message is transmitted, such as next hop. Post-policy
Adj-RIB-Out [MUST]{.bcp14} convey to the BMP receiver what is actually
transmitted to the peer.[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

The L flag [MUST]{.bcp14} be set to 1 to indicate
post-policy.[¶](#section-5.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Pre-policy](#name-pre-policy){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-pre-policy}

Similar to Adj-RIB-In policy validation, pre-policy Adj-RIB-Out can be
used to validate and audit outbound policies. For example, a comparison
between pre-policy and post-policy can be used to validate the outbound
policy.[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}

Depending on the BGP peering session type \-- Internal BGP (IBGP), IBGP
route reflector client, External BGP (EBGP), BGP confederations, route
server client \-- the candidate routes that make up the pre-policy
Adj-RIB-Out do not contain all local RIB routes. Pre-policy Adj-RIB-Out
conveys only routes that are available based on the peering type.
Post-policy represents the filtered/changed routes from the available
routes.[¶](#section-5.2-2){.pilcrow}

Some attributes are set only during transmission of the BGP message,
i.e., post-policy. It is common that the next hop may be null, loopback,
or similar during the pre-policy phase. All mandatory attributes, such
as next hop, [MUST]{.bcp14} be either zero or have an empty length if
they are unknown at the pre-policy phase completion. The BMP receiver
will treat zero or empty mandatory attributes as
self-originated.[¶](#section-5.2-3){.pilcrow}

The L flag [MUST]{.bcp14} be set to 0 to indicate
pre-policy.[¶](#section-5.2-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [BMP Messages](#name-bmp-messages){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-bmp-messages}

Many BMP messages have a per-peer header, but some are not applicable to
Adj-RIB-In or Adj-RIB-Out monitoring, such as Peer Up and Down
Notifications. Unless otherwise defined, the O flag should be set to 0
in the per-peer header in BMP messages.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-6.1 .section}
### [6.1.](#section-6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Route Monitoring and Route Mirroring](#name-route-monitoring-and-route-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-route-monitoring-and-route-}

The O flag [MUST]{.bcp14} be set accordingly to indicate if the route
monitor or route mirroring message conveys Adj-RIB-In or
Adj-RIB-Out.[¶](#section-6.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#StatisticsReport}
::: {#section-6.2 .section}
### [6.2.](#section-6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Statistics Report](#name-statistics-report){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-statistics-report}

The Statistics Report message has a Stat Type field to indicate the
statistic carried in the Stat Data field. Statistics report messages are
not specific to Adj-RIB-In or Adj-RIB-Out and [MUST]{.bcp14} have the O
flag set to zero. The O flag [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be ignored by the BMP
receiver.[¶](#section-6.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document defines the following new statistics
types:[¶](#section-6.2-2){.pilcrow}

-   [Stat Type = 14: Number of routes in pre-policy Adj-RIB-Out. This
    statistics type is 64-bit
    Gauge.[¶](#section-6.2-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.2-3.1}
-   [Stat Type = 15: Number of routes in post-policy Adj-RIB-Out. This
    statistics type is 64-bit
    Gauge.[¶](#section-6.2-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.2-3.2}
-   [Stat Type = 16: Number of routes in per-AFI/SAFI pre-policy
    Adj-RIB-Out. The value is structured as: 2-byte Address Family
    Identifier (AFI), 1-byte Subsequent Address Family Identifier
    (SAFI), followed by a 64-bit
    Gauge.[¶](#section-6.2-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.2-3.3}
-   [Stat Type = 17: Number of routes in per-AFI/SAFI post-policy
    Adj-RIB-Out. The value is structured as: 2-byte Address Family
    Identifier (AFI), 1-byte Subsequent Address Family Identifier
    (SAFI), followed by a 64-bit
    Gauge.[¶](#section-6.2-3.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.2-3.4}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6.3 .section}
### [6.3.](#section-6.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Peer Up and Down Notifications](#name-peer-up-and-down-notificati){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-peer-up-and-down-notificati}

Peer Up and Down Notifications convey BGP peering session state to BMP
receivers. The state is independent of whether or not route monitoring
or route mirroring messages will be sent for Adj-RIB-In, Adj-RIB-Out, or
both. BMP receiver implementations [SHOULD]{.bcp14} ignore the O flag in
Peer Up and Down Notifications.[¶](#section-6.3-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#PeerUpInfoTlv}
::: {#section-6.3.1 .section}
#### [6.3.1.](#section-6.3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Peer Up Information](#name-peer-up-information){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-peer-up-information}

This document defines the following Peer Up Information TLV
type:[¶](#section-6.3.1-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-6.3.1-2.1}
    Type = 4: Admin Label. The Information field contains a free-form
    UTF-8 string whose byte length is given by the Information Length
    field. The value is administratively assigned. There is no
    requirement to terminate the string with null or any other
    character.[¶](#section-6.3.1-2.1.1){.pilcrow}

    Multiple Admin Labels can be included in the Peer Up Notification.
    When multiple Admin Labels are included, the BMP receiver
    [MUST]{.bcp14} preserve their
    order.[¶](#section-6.3.1-2.1.2){.pilcrow}

    The Admin Label is optional.[¶](#section-6.3.1-2.1.3){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Other Considerations](#name-other-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-other-considerations}

::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Peer and Update Groups](#name-peer-and-update-groups){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-peer-and-update-groups}

Peer and update groups are used to group updates shared by many peers.
This is a level of efficiency in implementations, not a true
representation of what is conveyed to a peer in either pre-policy or
post-policy.[¶](#section-7.1-1){.pilcrow}

One of the use cases to monitor post-policy Adj-RIB-Out is to validate
and continually ensure the egress updates match what is expected. For
example, wholesale peers should never have routes with community X:Y
sent to them. In this use case, there may be hundreds of wholesale
peers, but a single peer could have represented the
group.[¶](#section-7.1-2){.pilcrow}

From a BMP perspective, it should be simple to include a group name in
the Peer Up, but it is more complex than that. BGP implementations have
evolved to provide comprehensive and structured policy grouping, such as
session, AFI/SAFI, and template-based group policy
inheritances.[¶](#section-7.1-3){.pilcrow}

This level of structure and inheritance of polices does not provide a
simple peer group name or ID, such as wholesale
peer.[¶](#section-7.1-4){.pilcrow}

This document defines a new Admin Label type for Peer Up Information
TLVs ([Section 6.3.1](#PeerUpInfoTlv){.xref}) that can be used instead
of requiring a group name. These labels have administrative scope
relevance. For example, labels \"type=wholesale\" and \"region=west\"
could be used to monitor expected policies.[¶](#section-7.1-5){.pilcrow}

Configuration and assignment of labels to peers are BGP
implementation-specific.[¶](#section-7.1-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7.2 .section}
### [7.2.](#section-7.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Changes to Existing BMP Session](#name-changes-to-existing-bmp-ses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-changes-to-existing-bmp-ses}

In case of any change that results in the alteration of behavior of an
existing BMP session (i.e., changes to filtering and table names), the
session [MUST]{.bcp14} be bounced with a Peer Down/Peer Up
sequence.[¶](#section-7.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

The considerations in [Section
11](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7854#section-11){.relref} of
\[[RFC7854](#RFC7854){.xref}\] apply to this document. Implementations
of this protocol [SHOULD]{.bcp14} require establishing sessions with
authorized and trusted monitoring devices. It is also believed that this
document does not add any additional security
considerations.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has assigned the following new parameters to the [\"BGP Monitoring
Protocol (BMP) Parameters\"
registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/bmp-parameters/).[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-9.1 .section}
### [9.1.](#section-9.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Addition to BMP Peer Flags Registry](#name-addition-to-bmp-peer-flags-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-addition-to-bmp-peer-flags-}

IANA has made the following assignment for the per-peer header flag
defined in [Section 4](#PeerFlags){.xref} of this
document:[¶](#section-9.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-addition-to-the-bmp-peer-fl}

::: {#iana1}
  Flag   Description   Reference
  ------ ------------- -----------
  3      O flag        RFC 8671

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [Addition to the \"BMP Peer Flags\"
  Registry](#name-addition-to-the-bmp-peer-fl){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#section-9.2 .section}
### [9.2.](#section-9.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Additions to BMP Statistics Types Registry](#name-additions-to-bmp-statistics){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-additions-to-bmp-statistics}

IANA has made the following assignment for the four statistics types
defined in [Section 6.2](#StatisticsReport){.xref} of this
document:[¶](#section-9.2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-additions-to-the-bmp-statis}

::: {#iana2}
  Stat Type   Description                                                Reference
  ----------- ---------------------------------------------------------- -----------
  14          Number of routes in pre-policy Adj-RIB-Out                 RFC 8671
  15          Number of routes in post-policy Adj-RIB-Out                RFC 8671
  16          Number of routes in per-AFI/SAFI pre-policy Adj-RIB-Out    RFC 8671
  17          Number of routes in per-AFI/SAFI post-policy Adj-RIB-Out   RFC 8671

  : [Table 2](#table-2){.selfRef}: [Additions to the \"BMP Statistics
  Types\" Registry](#name-additions-to-the-bmp-statis){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#section-9.3 .section}
### [9.3.](#section-9.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Addition to BMP Initiation Message TLVs Registry](#name-addition-to-bmp-initiation-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-addition-to-bmp-initiation-}

IANA has made the following assignment per [Section
6.3.1](#PeerUpInfoTlv){.xref} of this
document:[¶](#section-9.3-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-addition-to-the-bmp-initiat}

::: {#iana3}
  Type   Description   Reference
  ------ ------------- -----------
  4      Admin Label   RFC 8671

  : [Table 3](#table-3){.selfRef}: [Addition to the \"BMP Initiation
  Message TLVs\" Registry](#name-addition-to-the-bmp-initiat){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.

\[RFC4271\]
:   [Rekhter, Y., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Li, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Hares, Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Border Gateway Protocol 4
    (BGP-4)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4271]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4271]{.seriesInfo}, January 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4271>\>.

\[RFC7854\]
:   [Scudder, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Fernando, R.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Stuart]{.refAuthor}, [\"BGP Monitoring Protocol (BMP)\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 7854]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7854]{.seriesInfo}, June
    2016, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7854>\>.

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:::

::: {#Acknowledgements}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

The authors would like to thank John Scudder and Mukul Srivastava for
their valuable input.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Contributors}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Contributors](#name-contributors){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-contributors}

The following individuals contributed to this
document:[¶](#section-appendix.b-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Manish Bhardwaj, Cisco
    Systems[¶](#section-appendix.b-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.b-2.1}
-   [Xianyu Zheng,
    Tencent[¶](#section-appendix.b-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.b-2.2}
-   [Wei Guo,
    Tencent[¶](#section-appendix.b-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.b-2.3}
-   [Shugang Cheng,
    H3C[¶](#section-appendix.b-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.b-2.4}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.c .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Tim Evens]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[2901 Third Avenue, Suite 600]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Seattle]{.locality}, [WA]{.region} [98121]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <tievens@cisco.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Serpil Bayraktar]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[3700 Cisco Way]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[San Jose]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [95134]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <serpil@cisco.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Paolo Lucente]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[NTT Communications]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Siriusdreef 70-72]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[2132]{.postal-code} [Hoofddorp]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Netherlands]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <paolo@ntt.net>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Penghui Mi]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[China]{.country-name}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[200233]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Shanghai]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Tengyun Building, Tower A, No. 397 Tianlin Road]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Tencent]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <Penghui.Mi@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Shunwan Zhuang]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[China]{.country-name}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[100095]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Beijing]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Huawei Building, No.156 Beiqing Rd.]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Huawei]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <zhuangshunwan@huawei.com>
:::
:::
:::
