  RFC 8676             YANG Modules for A+P Softwires   November 2019
  -------------------- -------------------------------- ---------------
  Farrer & Boucadair   Standards Track                  \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8676](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8676){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   November 2019

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    I. Farrer, [Ed.]{.editor}
    :::

    ::: org
    Deutsche Telekom AG
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Boucadair, [Ed.]{.editor}
    :::

    ::: org
    Orange
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8676 {#rfcnum}

# YANG Modules for IPv4-in-IPv6 Address plus Port (A⁠+P) Softwires {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document defines YANG modules for the configuration and operation
of IPv4-in-IPv6 softwire Border Relays and Customer Premises Equipment
for the Lightweight 4over6, Mapping of Address and Port with
Encapsulation (MAP-E), and Mapping of Address and Port using Translation
(MAP-T) softwire mechanisms.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8676>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Overview of the
    Modules](#name-overview-of-the-modules){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [Overall
        Structure](#name-overall-structure){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [Configuration for Additional
        Components](#name-configuration-for-additiona){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Softwire CE YANG Tree
    Diagram](#name-softwire-ce-yang-tree-diagr){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [CE Tree
        Diagram](#name-ce-tree-diagram){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2}
        [4.2](#section-4.2){.xref}.  [Softwire CE Tree Diagram
        Description](#name-softwire-ce-tree-diagram-de){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Softwire BR YANG Tree
    Diagram](#name-softwire-br-yang-tree-diagr){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [BR Tree
        Diagram](#name-br-tree-diagram){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [Softwire BR Tree Diagram
        Description](#name-softwire-br-tree-diagram-de){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Softwire CE YANG
    Module](#name-softwire-ce-yang-module){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [BR Softwire YANG
    Module](#name-br-softwire-yang-module){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Common Softwire Element Groups YANG
    Module](#name-common-softwire-element-gro){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [11](#section-11){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.1}
        [11.1](#section-11.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.2}
        [11.2](#section-11.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [Appendix A](#section-appendix.a){.xref}.  [Configuration
    Examples](#name-configuration-examples){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.12.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12.2.1}
        [A.1](#section-a.1){.xref}.  [Configuration Example for a lw4o6
        BR
        Binding-Table](#name-configuration-example-for-a){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.12.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12.2.2}
        [A.2](#section-a.2){.xref}.  [Configuration Example for a MAP-E
        BR](#name-configuration-example-for-a-){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.12.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12.2.3}
        [A.3](#section-a.3){.xref}.  [lw4o6 CE Configuration
        Example](#name-lw4o6-ce-configuration-exam){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.12.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.13}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.13.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.14}
    [](#section-appendix.c){.xref}[Contributors](#name-contributors){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.14.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15}
    [](#section-appendix.d){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.15.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#introduction}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

The IETF Softwire Working Group has developed several IPv4-in-IPv6
softwire mechanisms to address various deployment contexts and
constraints. As a companion to the architectural specification
documents, this document focuses on the provisioning of Address plus
Port (A+P) softwire functional elements: Border Routers (BRs) and
Customer Edge (CE) (called \"Customer Premises Equipment (CPE)\" in
\[[RFC7596](#RFC7596){.xref}\]). The softwire mechanisms covered in this
document are Lightweight 4over6 (lw4o6) \[[RFC7596](#RFC7596){.xref}\],
Mapping of Address and Port with Encapsulation (MAP-E)
\[[RFC7597](#RFC7597){.xref}\], and Mapping of Address and Port using
Translation (MAP-T)
\[[RFC7599](#RFC7599){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

This document focuses on A+P mechanisms \[[RFC6346](#RFC6346){.xref}\];
the reader can refer to \[[RFC8513](#RFC8513){.xref}\] for a YANG module
for Dual-Stack Lite (DS-Lite)
\[[RFC6333](#RFC6333){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

This document defines YANG modules \[[RFC7950](#RFC7950){.xref}\] that
can be used to configure and manage A+P softwire elements using the
NETCONF \[[RFC6241](#RFC6241){.xref}\] or RESTCONF
\[[RFC8040](#RFC8040){.xref}\] protocols for:[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

-   [Configuration[¶](#section-1-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-1-4.1}
-   [Operational State[¶](#section-1-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-1-4.2}
-   [Notifications[¶](#section-1-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-1-4.3}
:::
:::

::: {#terminology}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

The reader should be familiar with the concepts and terms defined in
\[[RFC7596](#RFC7596){.xref}\], \[[RFC7597](#RFC7597){.xref}\],
\[[RFC7599](#RFC7599){.xref}\], and the YANG data modeling language
defined in \[[RFC7950](#RFC7950){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

The YANG modules in this document adopt the Network Management Datastore
Architecture (NMDA) \[[RFC8342](#RFC8342){.xref}\]. The meanings of the
symbols used in tree diagrams are defined in
\[[RFC8340](#RFC8340){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

The document uses the abbreviation \'BR\' as a general term for softwire
tunnel concentrators, including both MAP Border Routers
\[[RFC7597](#RFC7597){.xref}\] and Lightweight 4over6 lwAFTRs
\[[RFC7596](#RFC7596){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

For brevity, \"algorithm\" is used to refer to the \"mapping algorithm\"
defined in \[[RFC7597](#RFC7597){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

A network element may support one or multiple instances of a softwire
mechanism; each of these instances (i.e., binding instances, MAP-E
instances, or MAP-T instances) may have its own configuration and
parameters. The term \'algo-instance\' is used to denote both MAP-E and
MAP-T instances.[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#overview}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Overview of the Modules](#name-overview-of-the-modules){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-overview-of-the-modules}

::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Overall Structure](#name-overall-structure){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-overall-structure}

The document defines the following two YANG modules for the
configuration and monitoring of softwire functional
elements:[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-3.1-2.1}

    ietf-softwire-ce
    :   Provides configuration and monitoring for softwire CE element.
        This module is defined as augments to the interface YANG module
        \[[RFC8343](#RFC8343){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.1-2.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    ietf-softwire-br
    :   Provides configuration and monitoring for softwire BR
        element.[¶](#section-3.1-2.1.1.4){.pilcrow}
    :::

In addition, the following module is
defined:[¶](#section-3.1-3){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-3.1-4.1}

    ietf-softwire-common
    :   Contains groups of common functions that are imported into the
        CE and BR modules.[¶](#section-3.1-4.1.1.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

This approach has been taken so that the various modules can be easily
extended to support additional softwire mechanisms, if
required.[¶](#section-3.1-5){.pilcrow}

Within the BR and CE modules, the YANG \"feature\" statement is used to
distinguish which of the different softwire mechanism(s) is relevant for
a specific element\'s configuration. For each module, a choice statement
\'ce-type\' is included for either \'binding\' or \'algorithm\'.
\'Binding\' is used for configuring Lightweight 4over6, whereas
\'algorithm\' is used for configuring MAP-T or
MAP-E.[¶](#section-3.1-6){.pilcrow}

In the \'algo-instances\' container, a choice statement \'data-plane\'
is included to specify MAP-E (encapsulation) or MAP-T (translation).
[Table 1](#table_s46_mechanism_choices){.xref} shows how these choices
are used to indicate the desired softwire
mechanism:[¶](#section-3.1-7){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-softwire-mechanism-choice-s}

::: {#table_s46_mechanism_choices}
  S46 Mechanism        ce-type?    data-plane?
  -------------------- ----------- ---------------
  Lightweight 4over6   binding     n/a
  MAP-E                algorithm   encapsulation
  MAP-T                algorithm   translation

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [Softwire Mechanism Choice
  Statement Enumeration](#name-softwire-mechanism-choice-s){.selfRef}
:::

NETCONF notifications are also included.[¶](#section-3.1-9){.pilcrow}

Earlier draft versions of this specification combined the softwire
mechanisms by their associated technologies rather than their function
in the architecture. As the document was revised, it became apparent
that dividing the modules by their role in the architecture (CE or BR)
was a better approach as this follows the intended function and existing
implementation approaches more closely.[¶](#section-3.1-10.1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Configuration for Additional Components](#name-configuration-for-additiona){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-configuration-for-additiona}

The softwire modules only aim to provide configuration relevant for
softwires. In order to fully provision a CE element, the following may
also be necessary:[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

-   [IPv6 forwarding and routing configuration, to enable the CE to
    obtain one or more IPv6 prefixes for softwire usage. A YANG module
    for routing management is described in
    \[[RFC8349](#RFC8349){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.2-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.1}
-   [IPv4 routing configuration, to add one or more IPv4 destination
    prefix(es) reachable via the configured softwire. A YANG module for
    routing management is described in
    \[[RFC8349](#RFC8349){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.2-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.2}
-   [Stateful NAT44/NAPT management, to optionally specify a port set
    (Port Set Identifier (PSID)) along with its length. A YANG module
    for NAT management is described in
    \[[RFC8512](#RFC8512){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.2-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.3}
-   [Stateless NAT46 management, which is required by
    softwire-translation-based mechanisms (i.e., the assignment of a
    Network-Specific Prefix to use for IPv4/IPv6 translation). A YANG
    module for NAT management is described in
    \[[RFC8512](#RFC8512){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.2-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.4}

As YANG modules for the above functions are already defined in other
documents, their functionality is not duplicated here and they should be
referred to, as needed. [Appendix A.3](#lw4o6-ce-example){.xref}
provides XML examples of how these modules can be used
together.[¶](#section-3.2-3){.pilcrow}

The CE must already have minimal IPv6 configuration in place so it is
reachable by the NETCONF client to obtain softwire configuration. If
additional IPv6-specific configuration is necessary, the YANG modules
defined in \[[RFC8344](#RFC8344){.xref}\] and
\[[RFC8349](#RFC8349){.xref}\] may be used.[¶](#section-3.2-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#ce-tree-diagram}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Softwire CE YANG Tree Diagram](#name-softwire-ce-yang-tree-diagr){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-softwire-ce-yang-tree-diagr}

::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [CE Tree Diagram](#name-ce-tree-diagram){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ce-tree-diagram}

The CE module provides configuration and monitoring for all of the
softwire mechanisms covered in this document (i.e., Lightweight 4over6,
MAP-E, and MAP-T).[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}

This module augments \"ietf-interfaces\", defined in
\[[RFC8343](#RFC8343){.xref}\] with an entry for the softwire. This
entry can be referenced to configure IPv4 forwarding features for the
element. This entry is added only if tunnel type ([Section
10](#iana){.xref}) is set to \'aplusp\'.[¶](#section-4.1-2){.pilcrow}

[Figure 1](#tree-diagram-ce){.xref} shows the tree structure of the
softwire CE YANG module:[¶](#section-4.1-3){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-softwire-ce-yang-tree-diagra}

::: {#tree-diagram-ce}
::: {#section-4.1-4.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-yangtree}
          
module: ietf-softwire-ce
  augment /if:interfaces/if:interface:
    +--rw softwire-payload-mtu?   uint16
    +--rw softwire-path-mru?      uint16
    +--rw (ce-type)?
       +--:(binding) {binding-mode}?
       |  +--rw binding-ipv6info?       union
       |  +--rw br-ipv6-addr            inet:ipv6-address
       +--:(algo) {map-e or map-t}?
          +--rw algo-instances
             +--rw algo-instance* [name]
                +--rw name                string
                +--rw enable?             boolean
                +--rw algo-versioning
                |  +--rw version?   uint64
                |  +--rw date?      yang:date-and-time
                +--rw (data-plane)?
                |  +--:(encapsulation) {map-e}?
                |  |  +--rw br-ipv6-addr        inet:ipv6-address
                |  +--:(translation) {map-t}?
                |     +--rw dmr-ipv6-prefix?    inet:ipv6-prefix
                +--rw ea-len              uint8
                +--rw rule-ipv6-prefix    inet:ipv6-prefix
                +--rw rule-ipv4-prefix    inet:ipv4-prefix
                +--rw forwarding          boolean
  augment /if:interfaces/if:interface/if:statistics:
       +--ro sent-ipv4-packets?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro sent-ipv4-bytes?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro sent-ipv6-packets?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro sent-ipv6-bytes?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro rcvd-ipv4-packets?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro rcvd-ipv4-bytes?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro rcvd-ipv6-packets?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro rcvd-ipv6-bytes?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro dropped-ipv4-packets?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro dropped-ipv4-bytes?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro dropped-ipv6-packets?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro dropped-ipv6-bytes?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro dropped-ipv4-fragments?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro dropped-ipv4-fragment-bytes?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro ipv6-fragments-reassembled?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro ipv6-fragments-bytes-reassembled?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro out-icmpv4-error-packets?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro out-icmpv4-error-bytes?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro out-icmpv6-error-packets?
       |       yang:zero-based-counter64
       +--ro out-icmpv6-error-bytes?
               yang:zero-based-counter64

  notifications:
    +---n softwire-ce-event {binding-mode}?
       +--ro ce-binding-ipv6-addr-change    inet:ipv6-address
     
```

[¶](#section-4.1-4.1){.pilcrow}
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [Softwire CE YANG Tree
Diagram](#name-softwire-ce-yang-tree-diagra){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#tree-diagram-ce-desc}
::: {#section-4.2 .section}
### [4.2.](#section-4.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Softwire CE Tree Diagram Description](#name-softwire-ce-tree-diagram-de){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-softwire-ce-tree-diagram-de}

Additional information related to the operation of a CE element is
provided below:[¶](#section-4.2-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-4.2-2.1}

    softwire-payload-mtu:
    :   optionally used to set the IPv4 Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU)
        for the softwire. Needed if the softwire implementation is
        unable to correctly calculate the correct IPv4 MTU size
        automatically.[¶](#section-4.2-2.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    softwire-path-mru:
    :   optionally used to set the maximum IPv6 softwire packet size
        that can be received, including the encapsulation/translation
        overhead. Needed if the softwire implementation is unable to
        correctly calculate the correct IPv4 payload Maximum Receive
        Unit (MRU) size automatically (see [Section
        3.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4213#section-3.2){.relref}
        of
        \[[RFC4213](#RFC4213){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-4.2-2.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    ce-type:
    :   provides a choice statement allowing the binding or algorithmic
        softwire mechanisms to be
        selected.[¶](#section-4.2-2.1.1.6){.pilcrow}
    :::

Further details relevant to binding softwire elements are as
follows:[¶](#section-4.2-3){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-4.2-4.1}

    binding-ipv6info:
    :   used to set the IPv6 binding prefix type to identify which IPv6
        address to use as the tunnel source. It can be \'ipv6-prefix\'
        or \'ipv6-address\'.[¶](#section-4.2-4.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    br-ipv6-addr:
    :   sets the IPv6 address of the remote
        BR.[¶](#section-4.2-4.1.1.4){.pilcrow}
    :::

Additional details relevant to some of the important algorithmic
elements are provided below:[¶](#section-4.2-5){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-4.2-6.1}

    algo-versioning:
    :   optionally used to associate a version number and/or timestamp
        to the algorithm. This can be used for logging/data retention
        purposes \[[RFC7422](#RFC7422){.xref}\]. The version number is
        selected to uniquely identify the algorithm configuration and a
        new value written whenever a change is made to the algorithm or
        a new algo-instance is
        created.[¶](#section-4.2-6.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    forwarding:
    :   specifies whether the rule can be used as a Forwarding Mapping
        Rule (FMR). If not set, this rule is a Basic Mapping Rule (BMR)
        only and must not be used for forwarding. Refer to [Section
        4.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7598#section-4.1){.relref}
        of
        \[[RFC7598](#RFC7598){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4.2-6.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    ea-len:
    :   used to set the length of the Embedded-Address (EA), which is
        defined in the mapping rule for a MAP
        domain.[¶](#section-4.2-6.1.1.6){.pilcrow}

    data-plane:
    :   provides a choice statement for either encapsulation (MAP-E) or
        translation (MAP-T).[¶](#section-4.2-6.1.1.8){.pilcrow}

    br-ipv6-addr:
    :   defines the IPv6 address of the BR. This information is valid
        for MAP-E.[¶](#section-4.2-6.1.1.10){.pilcrow}

    dmr-ipv6-prefix:
    :   defines the Default Mapping Rule (DMR) IPv6 prefix of the BR.
        This information is valid for
        MAP-T.[¶](#section-4.2-6.1.1.12){.pilcrow}
    :::

Additional information on the notification node is listed
below:[¶](#section-4.2-7){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-4.2-8.1}

    ce-binding-ipv6-addr-change:
    :   if the CE\'s binding IPv6 address changes for any reason, the
        NETCONF client will be
        notified.[¶](#section-4.2-8.1.1.2){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#br-tree-diagram}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Softwire BR YANG Tree Diagram](#name-softwire-br-yang-tree-diagr){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-softwire-br-yang-tree-diagr}

::: {#br-tree-diagram-com}
::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [BR Tree Diagram](#name-br-tree-diagram){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-br-tree-diagram}

The BR YANG module provides configuration and monitoring for all of the
softwire mechanisms covered in this document (i.e., Lightweight 4over6,
MAP-E, and MAP-T).[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

[Figure 2](#br-structure){.xref} provides the tree structure of this
module:[¶](#section-5.1-2){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-softwire-br-yang-tree}

::: {#br-structure}
::: {#section-5.1-3.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-yangtree}
module: ietf-softwire-br
  +--rw br-instances
     +--rw (br-type)?
        +--:(binding) {binding-mode}?
        |  +--rw binding
        |     +--rw bind-instance* [name]
        |        +--rw name                       string
        |        +--rw binding-table-versioning
        |        |  +--rw version?   uint64
        |        |  +--rw date?      yang:date-and-time
        |        +--rw softwire-num-max      uint32
        |        +--rw softwire-payload-mtu       uint16
        |        +--rw softwire-path-mru           uint16
        |        +--rw enable-hairpinning?         boolean
        |        +--rw binding-table
        |        |  +--rw binding-entry* [binding-ipv6info]
        |        |     +--rw binding-ipv6info     union
        |        |     +--rw binding-ipv4-addr?
        |        |     |       inet:ipv4-address
        |        |     +--rw port-set
        |        |     |  +--rw psid-offset?   uint8
        |        |     |  +--rw psid-len       uint8
        |        |     |  +--rw psid           uint16
        |        |     +--rw br-ipv6-addr?
        |        |             inet:ipv6-address
        |        +--rw icmp-policy
        |        |  +--rw icmpv4-errors
        |        |  |  +--rw allow-incoming-icmpv4?    boolean
        |        |  |  +--rw icmpv4-rate?              uint32
        |        |  |  +--rw generate-icmpv4-errors?   boolean
        |        |  +--rw icmpv6-errors
        |        |     +--rw generate-icmpv6-errors?   boolean
        |        |     +--rw icmpv6-rate?              uint32
        |        +--ro traffic-stat
        |           +--ro discontinuity-time   yang:date-and-time
        |           +--ro sent-ipv4-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro sent-ipv4-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro sent-ipv6-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro sent-ipv6-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro rcvd-ipv4-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro rcvd-ipv4-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro rcvd-ipv6-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro rcvd-ipv6-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro dropped-ipv4-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro dropped-ipv4-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro dropped-ipv6-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro dropped-ipv6-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro dropped-ipv4-fragments?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro dropped-ipv4-fragment-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro ipv6-fragments-reassembled?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro ipv6-fragments-bytes-reassembled?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro out-icmpv4-error-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro out-icmpv4-error-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro out-icmpv6-error-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro out-icmpv6-error-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro dropped-icmpv4-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro dropped-icmpv4-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro hairpin-ipv4-packets?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro hairpin-ipv4-bytes?
        |           |       yang:zero-based-counter64
        |           +--ro active-softwire-num?
        |                   uint32
        +--:(algo) {map-e or map-t}?
           +--rw algorithm
              +--rw algo-instance* [name]
                 +--rw name                string
                 +--rw enable?             boolean
                 +--rw algo-versioning
                 |  +--rw version?   uint64
                 |  +--rw date?      yang:date-and-time
                 +--rw (data-plane)?
                 |  +--:(encapsulation) {map-e}?
                 |  |  +--rw br-ipv6-addr        inet:ipv6-address
                 |  +--:(translation) {map-t}?
                 |     +--rw dmr-ipv6-prefix?    inet:ipv6-prefix
                 +--rw ea-len              uint8
                 +--rw rule-ipv6-prefix    inet:ipv6-prefix
                 +--rw rule-ipv4-prefix    inet:ipv4-prefix
                 +--rw forwarding          boolean
                 +--rw port-set
                 |  +--rw psid-offset?   uint8
                 |  +--rw psid-len       uint8
                 |  +--rw psid           uint16
                 +--ro traffic-stat
                    +--ro discontinuity-time   yang:date-and-time
                    +--ro sent-ipv4-packets?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro sent-ipv4-bytes?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro sent-ipv6-packets?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro sent-ipv6-bytes?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro rcvd-ipv4-packets?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro rcvd-ipv4-bytes?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro rcvd-ipv6-packets?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro rcvd-ipv6-bytes?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro dropped-ipv4-packets?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro dropped-ipv4-bytes?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro dropped-ipv6-packets?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro dropped-ipv6-bytes?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro dropped-ipv4-fragments?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro dropped-ipv4-fragment-bytes?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro ipv6-fragments-reassembled?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro ipv6-fragments-bytes-reassembled?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro out-icmpv4-error-packets?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro out-icmpv4-error-bytes?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro out-icmpv6-error-packets?
                    |       yang:zero-based-counter64
                    +--ro out-icmpv6-error-bytes?
                            yang:zero-based-counter64

  notifications:
    +---n softwire-binding-instance-event {binding-mode}?
    |  +--ro bind-name?
    |  |       -> /br-instances/binding/bind-instance/name
    |  +--ro invalid-entry*    leafref
    |  +--ro added-entry*      inet:ipv6-address
    |  +--ro modified-entry*   leafref
    +---n softwire-algorithm-instance-event  {map-e, map-t}?
       +--ro algo-name
       |       -> /br-instances/algorithm/algo-instance/name
       +--ro invalid-entry-id*
       |       -> /br-instances/algorithm/algo-instance/name
       +--ro added-entry*
       |       -> /br-instances/algorithm/algo-instance/name
       +--ro modified-entry*
               -> /br-instances/algorithm/algo-instance/name
```

[¶](#section-5.1-3.1){.pilcrow}
:::

[Figure 2](#figure-2){.selfRef}: [Softwire BR YANG
Tree](#name-softwire-br-yang-tree){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#tree-diagram-br-desc}
::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Softwire BR Tree Diagram Description](#name-softwire-br-tree-diagram-de){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-softwire-br-tree-diagram-de}

The descriptions for leaves that are common with the CE module are
provided in [Section 4.2](#tree-diagram-ce-desc){.xref}. Descriptions
for additional elements are provided below:[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-5.2-2.1}

    binding-table-versioning:
    :   optionally used to associate a version number and/or timestamp
        to the binding table. This can be used for logging or data
        retention purposes \[[RFC7422](#RFC7422){.xref}\]. The version
        number is selected to uniquely identify the binding table
        configuration and a new timestamp value written whenever a
        change is made to the contents of the binding table or a new
        binding table list is
        created.[¶](#section-5.2-2.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    binding-entry:
    :   used to define the binding relationship between 3-tuples
        {lwB4\'s IPv6 address/prefix, the allocated IPv4 address,
        restricted port-set}.  For detailed information, please refer to
        \[[RFC7596](#RFC7596){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5.2-2.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    softwire-num-max:
    :   used to set the maximum number of softwire binding rules that
        can be created on the lw4o6 element simultaneously. This
        parameter must not be set to zero because this is equivalent to
        disabling the BR instance.[¶](#section-5.2-2.1.1.6){.pilcrow}

    active-softwire-num:
    :   holds the number of softwires currently provisioned on the BR
        element.[¶](#section-5.2-2.1.1.8){.pilcrow}
    :::

Additional information on some of the important notification nodes is
listed below:[¶](#section-5.2-3){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-5.2-4.1}

    invalid-entry, added-entry, modified-entry:
    :   used to notify the NETCONF client that a specific binding entry
        or MAP rule has expired, been invalidated, added, or
        modified.[¶](#section-5.2-4.1.1.2){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#ce-yang-module}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Softwire CE YANG Module](#name-softwire-ce-yang-module){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-softwire-ce-yang-module}

This module imports the modules defined in
\[[RFC6991](#RFC6991){.xref}\], \[[RFC8343](#RFC8343){.xref}\], and
\[[RFC7224](#RFC7224){.xref}\]. It also imports the
\'ietf-softwire-common\' and \'iana-tunnel-type\' modules
\[[RFC8675](#RFC8675){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-6-2}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-yang}
<CODE BEGINS> file "ietf-softwire-ce@2019-11-16.yang"

module ietf-softwire-ce {
  yang-version 1.1;
  namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-ce";
  prefix softwire-ce;

  import ietf-inet-types {
    prefix inet;
    reference 
      "RFC 6991: Common YANG Data Types, Section 4";
  }
  import ietf-interfaces {
    prefix if;
    reference 
      "RFC 8343: A YANG Data Model for Interface Management";
  }
  import ietf-softwire-common {
    prefix softwire-common;
    reference
      "RFC 8676: YANG Modules for IPv4-in-IPv6 Address plus Port
       Softwires";
  }
  import iana-tunnel-type {
    prefix iana-tunnel-type;
    reference
      "RFC 8675: A YANG Data Model for Tunnel Interface Types";
  }

  organization
    "IETF Softwire Working Group";
  contact
    "WG Web:   <https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/softwire/>
     WG List:  <mailto:softwire@ietf.org>

     Author:  Qi Sun 
              <mailto:sunqi.ietf@gmail.com>

     Author:  Linhui Sun 
              <mailto:lh.sunlinh@gmail.com>

     Author:  Yong Cui 
              <mailto:yong@csnet1.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn>

     Editor:  Ian Farrer 
              <mailto:ian.farrer@telekom.de>

     Author:  Sladjana Zoric 
              <mailto:sladjana.zoric@telekom.de>

     Editor:  Mohamed Boucadair 
              <mailto:mohamed.boucadair@orange.com>

     Author:  Rajiv Asati  
               <mailto:rajiva@cisco.com>";
  description
    "This document defines a YANG module for the configuration and
     management of A+P Softwire Customer Premises Equipment (CEs). 
     It covers Lightweight 4over6, MAP-E, and MAP-T mechanisms.
          
     Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
     authors of the code.  All rights reserved.
          
     Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
     without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject
     to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License
     set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
     Relating to IETF Documents
     (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
          
     This version of this YANG module is part of RFC 8676; see
     the RFC itself for full legal notices.";

  revision 2019-11-16 {
    description
      "Initial revision.";
    reference
      "RFC 8676: YANG Modules for IPv4-in-IPv6 Address plus Port 
       (A+P) Softwires";
  }

  /*
   * Features
   */

  feature binding-mode {
    description
      "Binding is used for configuring the Lightweight 4over6 
       mechanism.

       Binding-based softwire mechanisms are IPv4-over-IPv6 tunneling
       transition mechanisms specifically intended for complete
       independence between the IPv6 subnet prefix (and IPv6 address)
       and IPv4 address, with or without IPv4 address sharing.

       This is accomplished by maintaining state for each softwire
       (per-subscriber state) in the central Border Relay (BR) and 
       using a hub-and-spoke forwarding architecture.  In order to 
       delegate the NAPT function and achieve IPv4 address sharing,
       port-restricted IPv4 addresses needs to be allocated to CEs.

       This feature indicates that the network element can function 
       as one or more binding-based softwire instances.";
    reference
      "RFC 7596: Lightweight 4over6: An Extension to the Dual-Stack 
       Lite Architecture
       RFC 7597: Mapping of Address and Port with Encapsulation 
       (MAP-E) 
       RFC 7599: Mapping of Address and Port using Translation 
       (MAP-T)";
  }

  feature map-e {
    description
      "MAP-E is an IPv6 transition mechanism for transporting IPv4
       packets across an IPv6 network using IP encapsulation.  MAP-E
       allows for a reduction of the amount of centralized state 
       using rules to express IPv4/IPv6 address mappings.  This 
       introduces an algorithmic relationship between the IPv6 
       subnet and IPv4 address.

       This feature indicates that the network element can function
       as one or more MAP-E softwire instances.";
    reference 
      "RFC 7597: Mapping of Address and Port with
       Encapsulation (MAP-E)";
  }

  feature map-t {
    description
      "MAP-T is an IPv6 transition mechanism for transporting IPv4
       packets across an IPv6 network using IP translation.  It 
       leverages a double stateless NAT64-based solution as well as
       the stateless algorithmic address and transport layer port
       mapping algorithm defined for MAP-E.

       This feature indicates that the network element can function
       as one or more MAP-T softwire instances.";
    reference 
      "RFC 7599: Mapping of Address and Port using Translation 
       (MAP-T)";
  }

  // Binding Entry

  grouping binding-entry {
    description
      "The binding BR (Border Relay) maintains an address 
       binding table that contains the binding between the CE's 
       IPv6 address, the allocated IPv4 address, and the 
       restricted port-set.";
    leaf binding-ipv6info {
      type union {
        type inet:ipv6-address;
        type inet:ipv6-prefix;
      }
      description
        "The IPv6 information for a binding entry.

         When the IPv6 prefix type is used, 
         the IPv6 source address of the CE is constructed
         according to the description in RFC 7596.

         If the IPv6 address type is used, the CE can use
         any valid /128 address from a prefix assigned to
         the CE.";
      reference 
        "RFC 7596: Lightweight 4over6: An Extension 
         to the Dual-Stack Lite Architecture, Section 5.1";
    }
    leaf br-ipv6-addr {
      type inet:ipv6-address;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "The IPv6 address of the binding BR.";
    }
  }

  // configuration and stateful parameters for softwire CE interface

  augment "/if:interfaces/if:interface" {
    when "derived-from(if:type, 'iana-tunnel-type:aplusp')";
    description
      "Softwire CE interface configuration";
    leaf softwire-payload-mtu {
      type uint16;
      units "bytes";
      description
        "The payload IPv4 MTU for the softwire tunnel.";
    }
    leaf softwire-path-mru {
      type uint16;
      units "bytes";
      description
        "The path MRU for the softwire (payload + encapsulation
         overhead).";
      reference
        "RFC 4213: Basic Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and 
         Routers"; 
    }
    choice ce-type {
      description
        "Sets the softwire CE mechanism";
      case binding {
        if-feature "binding-mode";
        description
          "CE binding configuration";
        uses binding-entry;
      }
      case algo {
        if-feature "map-e or map-t";
        description
          "CE algorithm configuration";
        container algo-instances {
          description
            "Collection of MAP-E/MAP-T parameters";
          list algo-instance {
            key "name";
            description
              "MAP forwarding rule instance for 
               MAP-E/MAP-T";
            leaf name {
              type string;
              mandatory true;
              description
                "The name is used to uniquely identify an algorithm 
                 instance.

                 This name can be automatically assigned
                 or explicitly configured.";
            }
            uses softwire-common:algorithm-instance;
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
  augment "/if:interfaces/if:interface/if:statistics" {
    when "derived-from(../if:type, 'iana-tunnel-type:aplusp')";
    description
      "Softwire CE interface statistics.";
    uses softwire-common:traffic-stat;
  }

  /*
   * Notifications
   */

  notification softwire-ce-event {
    if-feature "binding-mode";
    description
      "CE notification";
    leaf ce-binding-ipv6-addr-change {
      type inet:ipv6-address;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "This notification is generated whenever the CE's binding 
         IPv6 address changes for any reason.";
    }
  }
}

<CODE ENDS>
```

[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#br-yang-module}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [BR Softwire YANG Module](#name-br-softwire-yang-module){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-br-softwire-yang-module}

This module imports typedefs from \[[RFC6991](#RFC6991){.xref}\]. It
also imports the \'ietf-softwire-common\'
module.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-7-2}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-yang}
<CODE BEGINS> file "ietf-softwire-br@2019-11-16.yang"

module ietf-softwire-br {
  yang-version 1.1;
  namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-br";
  prefix softwire-br;

  import ietf-inet-types {
    prefix inet;
    reference 
      "RFC 6991: Common YANG Data Types, Section 4";
  }
  import ietf-yang-types {
    prefix yang;
    reference 
      "RFC 6991: Common YANG Data Types, Section 3";
  }
  import ietf-softwire-common {
    prefix softwire-common;
    reference
      "RFC 8676: YANG Modules for IPv4-in-IPv6 Address plus Port
       (A+P) Softwires";
  }

  organization
    "IETF Softwire Working Group";
  contact
    "WG Web:   <https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/softwire/>
     WG List:  <mailto:softwire@ietf.org>

     Author:  Qi Sun 
              <mailto:sunqi.ietf@gmail.com>

     Author:  Linhui Sun 
              <mailto:lh.sunlinh@gmail.com>

     Author:  Yong Cui 
              <mailto:yong@csnet1.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn>

     Editor:  Ian Farrer 
              <mailto:ian.farrer@telekom.de>

     Author:  Sladjana Zoric 
              <mailto:sladjana.zoric@telekom.de>

     Editor:  Mohamed Boucadair 
              <mailto:mohamed.boucadair@orange.com>

     Author:  Rajiv Asati 
               <mailto:rajiva@cisco.com>";

  description
    "This document defines a YANG module for the configuration and
     management of A+P Softwire Border Routers.  It covers 
     Lightweight 4over6, MAP-E, and MAP-T mechanisms.
          
     Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
     authors of the code.  All rights reserved.
          
     Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
     without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject
     to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License
     set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
     Relating to IETF Documents
     (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
          
     This version of this YANG module is part of RFC 8676; see
     the RFC itself for full legal notices.";

  revision 2019-11-16 {
    description
      "Initial revision.";
    reference
      "RFC 8676: YANG Modules for IPv4-in-IPv6 Address plus Port
       (A+P) Softwires";
  }

  /*
   * Groupings
   */

  grouping port-set {
    description
      "Describes a set of Layer 4 port numbers.

       This may be a simple port range, or use the Port Set 
       Identifier (PSID) algorithm to represent a range of transport 
       layer ports that will be used by a NAPT.";
    leaf psid-offset {
      type uint8 {
        range "0..16";
      }
      description
        "The number of offset bits.  In Lightweight 4over6,
         the default value is 0 for assigning one contiguous
         port range.  In MAP-E/T, the default value is 6,
         which means the system ports (0-1023) are excluded by
         default and the assigned port ranges are distributed across 
         the entire port space, depending on either psid-len or the
         number of contiguous ports.";
    }
    leaf psid-len {
      type uint8 {
        range "0..15";
      }
      mandatory true;
      description
        "The length of PSID, representing the sharing
         ratio for an IPv4 address.  This, along with ea-len, can
         be used to calculate the number of contiguous ports per
         port range";
    }
    leaf psid {
      type uint16;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "Port Set Identifier (PSID) value, which
         identifies a set of ports algorithmically.";
    }
  }

  grouping binding-entry {
    description
      "The binding BR maintains an address binding table that 
       contains the binding between the CE's IPv6 address, 
       the allocated IPv4 address and restricted port-set.";
    leaf binding-ipv6info {
      type union {
        type inet:ipv6-address;
        type inet:ipv6-prefix;
      }
      description
        "The IPv6 information for a CE binding entry.
         When the IPv6 prefix type is used, 
         the IPv6 source address of the CE is constructed
         according to the description in RFC 7596;
         if the IPv6 address type is used, the CE can use
         any valid /128 address from a prefix assigned to
         the CE.";
      reference
        "RFC 7596: Lightweight 4over6: An Extension to the Dual-Stack
         Lite Architecture";
    }
    leaf binding-ipv4-addr {
      type inet:ipv4-address;
      description
        "The IPv4 address assigned to the binding CE, 
         which is used as the IPv4 external address
         for binding CE local NAPT44.";
    }
    container port-set {
      description
        "For Lightweight 4over6, the default value
         for offset should be 0, to configure one contiguous
         port range.";
      uses port-set {
        refine "psid-offset" {
          default "0";
        }
      }
    }
    leaf br-ipv6-addr {
      type inet:ipv6-address;
      description
        "The IPv6 address for binding BR.";
    }
  }

  /*
   * Features
   */

  feature binding-mode {
    description
      "Binding is used for configuring the Lightweight 4over6 
       mechanism.

       Binding-based softwire mechanisms are IPv4-over-IPv6 tunneling
       transition mechanisms specifically intended for complete
       independence between the IPv6 subnet prefix (and IPv6 address) 
       and IPv4 address, with or without IPv4 address sharing.

       This is accomplished by maintaining state for each softwire
       (per-subscriber state) in the central Border Relay (BR) and 
       using a hub-and-spoke forwarding architecture.  In order to 
       delegate the NAPT function and achieve IPv4 address sharing, 
       port-restricted IPv4 addresses needs to be allocated to CEs.

       This feature indicates that the network element can function
       as one or more binding-based softwire instances.";
    reference
      "RFC 7596: Lightweight 4over6: An Extension to the Dual-Stack 
       Lite Architecture
       RFC 7597: Mapping of Address and Port with Encapsulation 
       (MAP-E) 
       RFC 7599: Mapping of Address and Port using Translation 
       (MAP-T)";
  }

  feature map-e {
    description
      "MAP-E is an IPv6 transition mechanism for transporting IPv4
       packets across an IPv6 network using IP encapsulation.  MAP-E
       allows for a reduction of the amount of centralized state 
       using rules to express IPv4/IPv6 address mappings.  This 
       introduces an algorithmic relationship between the IPv6 subnet 
       and IPv4 address.

       This feature indicates that the network element can function 
       as one or more MAP-E softwire instances.";
    reference 
      "RFC 7597: Mapping of Address and Port with Encapsulation
       (MAP-E)";
  }

  feature map-t {
    description
      "MAP-T is an IPv6 transition mechanism for transporting IPv4
       packets across an IPv6 network using IP translation.  It 
       leverages a double stateless NAT64-based solution as well 
       as the stateless algorithmic address and transport layer 
       port mapping algorithm defined for MAP-E.

       This feature indicates that the network element can function
       as one or more MAP-T softwire instances.";
    reference 
      "RFC 7599: Mapping of Address and Port using Translation 
       (MAP-T)";
  }

  container br-instances {
    description
      "BR instances enabled in a network element.";
    choice br-type {
      description
        "Select binding or algorithmic BR functionality.";
      case binding {
        if-feature "binding-mode";
        container binding {
          description
            "binding mechanism (binding table) configuration.";
          list bind-instance {
            key "name";
            description
              "A set of binding instances to be configured.";
            leaf name {
              type string;
              mandatory true;
              description
                "The name for the binding BR.  It is used to uniquely
                 distinguish a binding instance by its name.";
            }
            container binding-table-versioning {
              description
                "binding table's version";
              leaf version {
                type uint64;
                description
                  "Version number for this binding table.";
              }
              leaf date {
                type yang:date-and-time;
                description
                  "Timestamp when the binding table was activated.

                   A binding instance may be provided with binding 
                   entries that may change in time (e.g., increase
                   the size of the port set).  When a party who is 
                   the victim of abuse presents an external IP 
                   address/port, the version of the binding table 
                   is important because, depending on the version, 
                   a distinct customer may be identified.

                   The timestamp is used as a key to find the 
                   appropriate binding table that was put into effect 
                   when an abuse occurred.";
                reference
                  "RFC 7422: Deterministic Address Mapping to Reduce 
                   Logging in Carrier-Grade NAT Deployments";
              }
            }
            leaf softwire-num-max {
              type uint32 {
                range "1..max";
              }
              mandatory true;
              description
                "The maximum number of softwires that can be created 
                 on the binding BR.";
            }
            leaf softwire-payload-mtu {
              type uint16;
              units "bytes";
              mandatory true;
              description
                "The payload IPv4 MTU for binding softwire.";
            }
            leaf softwire-path-mru {
              type uint16;
              units "bytes";
              mandatory true;
              description
                "The path MRU for binding softwire";
              reference
                "RFC 4213: Basic Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts
                           and Routers";
            }
            leaf enable-hairpinning {
              type boolean;
              default "true";
              description
                "Enables/disables support for locally forwarding
                 (hairpinning) traffic between two CEs";
              reference 
                "RFC 7596: Lightweight 4over6: An Extension to 
                 the Dual-Stack Lite Architecture, Section 6.2";
            }
            container binding-table {
              description
                "binding table";
              list binding-entry {
                key "binding-ipv6info";
                description
                  "binding entry";
                uses binding-entry;
              }
            }
            container icmp-policy {
              description
                "The binding BR can be configured to process or drop
                 incoming ICMP messages and to generate outgoing ICMP
                 error messages.";
              container icmpv4-errors {
                description
                  "ICMPv4 error processing configuration";
                leaf allow-incoming-icmpv4 {
                  type boolean;
                  default "true";
                  description
                    "Enables the processing of incoming ICMPv4
                     packets.";
                  reference
                    "RFC 7596: Lightweight 4over6: An Extension to 
                     the Dual-Stack Lite Architecture";
                }
                leaf icmpv4-rate {
                  type uint32;
                  description
                    "Rate limit threshold in messages per second
                     for processing incoming ICMPv4 errors messages";
                }
                leaf generate-icmpv4-errors {
                  type boolean;
                  default "true";
                  description
                    "Enables the generation of outgoing ICMPv4 error
                     messages on receipt of an inbound IPv4 packet 
                     with no matching binding table entry.";
                  reference 
                    "RFC 7596: Lightweight 4over6:
                     An Extension to the Dual-Stack Lite
                     Architecture, Section 5.2";
                }
              }
              container icmpv6-errors {
                description
                  "ICMPv6 error processing configuration";
                leaf generate-icmpv6-errors {
                  type boolean;
                  default "true";
                  description
                    "Enables the generation of ICMPv6 error messages 
                     if no matching binding table entry is found for
                     a received packet.";
                  reference 
                    "RFC 7596: Lightweight 4over6:
                     An Extension to the Dual-Stack Lite
                     Architecture, Section 6.2";
                }
                leaf icmpv6-rate {
                  type uint32;
                  description
                    "Rate limit threshold in messages per second
                     for sending ICMPv6 errors messages";
                  reference 
                    "RFC 7596: Lightweight 4over6: An Extension
                     to the Dual-Stack Lite Architecture, Section 9";
                }
              }
            }
            container traffic-stat {
              config false;
              description
                "Traffic statistics information for the BR.";
              leaf discontinuity-time {
                type yang:date-and-time;
                mandatory true;
                description
                  "The time of the most recent occasion on which the 
                   BR instance suffered a discontinuity.  This must 
                   be initialized when the BR instance is configured 
                   or rebooted.";
              }
              uses softwire-common:traffic-stat;
              leaf dropped-icmpv4-packets {
                type yang:zero-based-counter64;
                description
                  "ICMPv4 packets that are dropped as a result
                   of the ICMP policy.  Typically, this can be any
                   incoming ICMPv4 packets if ICMPv4 processing is  
                   disabled or incoming ICMPv4 packets that exceed 
                   the ICMPv4 rate-limit threshold.
                            
                   Discontinuities in the value of this counter can 
                   occur at re-initialization of the management
                   system and at other times as indicated by
                   the value of 'discontinuity-time'.";
              }
              leaf dropped-icmpv4-bytes {
                type yang:zero-based-counter64;
                description
                  "ICMPv4 messages, in bytes, that are dropped as 
                   a result of the ICMP policy.  Typically, it 
                   can be any incoming ICMPv4 packets if ICMPv4
                   processing is disabled or incoming ICMPv4  
                   packets that exceed the ICMPv4 rate-limit 
                   threshold.
                            
                   Discontinuities in the value of this counter can 
                   occur at re-initialization of the management
                   system and at other times as indicated by
                   the value of 'discontinuity-time'.";
              }
              leaf hairpin-ipv4-packets {
                type yang:zero-based-counter64;
                description
                  "IPv4 packets locally routed between two CEs
                   (hairpinned).
                            
                   Discontinuities in the value of this counter can 
                   occur at re-initialization of the management
                   system and at other times as indicated by
                   the value of 'discontinuity-time'.";
              }
              leaf hairpin-ipv4-bytes {
                type yang:zero-based-counter64;
                description
                  "IPv4 bytes locally routed between two CEs
                   (hairpinned).
                                   
                   Discontinuities in the value of this counter can 
                   occur at re-initialization of the management
                   system and at other times as indicated by
                   the value of 'discontinuity-time'.";
              }
              leaf active-softwire-num {
                type uint32;
                config false;
                description
                  "The number of currently active softwires on the
                   binding instance.

                   Discontinuities in the value of this counter can 
                   occur at re-initialization of the management
                   system and at other times as indicated by
                   the value of 'discontinuity-time'.";
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
      case algo {
        if-feature "map-e or map-t";
        container algorithm {
          description
            "A set of parameters used for MAP-E/MAP-T";
          list algo-instance {
            key "name";
            description
              "Instances of algorithm";
            leaf name {
              type string;
              mandatory true;
              description
                "The name is used to uniquely identify an algorithm 
                 instance.

                 This name can be automatically assigned
                 or explicitly configured.";
            }
            uses softwire-common:algorithm-instance;
            container port-set {
              description
                "Indicates a set of ports.";
              uses port-set;
            }
            container traffic-stat {
              config false;
              description
                "Traffic statistics information for the BR.";
              leaf discontinuity-time {
                type yang:date-and-time;
                mandatory true;
                description
                  "The time of the most recent occasion on which the
                   BR instance suffered a discontinuity.  This must
                   be reset to the current date-and-time when the BR  
                   instance is configured or rebooted.";
              }
              uses softwire-common:traffic-stat;
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }

  /*
   * Notifications
   */

  notification softwire-binding-instance-event {
    if-feature "binding-mode";
    description
      "Notifications for the binding instance when an entry is 
       added, modified, or is not valid anymore.";
    leaf bind-name {
      type leafref {
        path "/br-instances/binding/bind-instance/name";
      }
      description
        "The name of the binding-instance that
         generated the notification.";
    }
    leaf-list invalid-entry {
      type leafref {
        path "/br-instances/binding/"
           + "bind-instance[name=current()/../bind-name]/"
           + "binding-table/binding-entry/binding-ipv6info";
      }
      description
        "Notify the client that a specific binding entry has 
         expired or is invalid.  The binding-ipv6info identifies 
         an entry.";
    }
    leaf-list added-entry {
      type inet:ipv6-address;
      description
        "Notify the client that a binding entry has been added.
         The IPv6 address of that entry is the index.  The client
         gets other information from the binding BR about the entry
         indexed by that ipv6 address.";
    }
    leaf-list modified-entry {
      type leafref {
        path "/br-instances/binding/"
           + "bind-instance[name=current()/../bind-name]/"
           + "binding-table/binding-entry/binding-ipv6info";
      }
      description
        "The binding table entry that has been modified.";
    }
  }
  notification softwire-algorithm-instance-event {
    if-feature "map-e or map-t";
    description
      "Notifications for an algorithm instance when an entry is 
       added, modified, or is not valid anymore.";
    leaf algo-name {
      type leafref {
        path "/br-instances/algorithm/algo-instance/name";
      }
      mandatory true;
      description
        "Algorithmic instance event.";
    }
    leaf-list invalid-entry {
      type leafref {
        path "/br-instances/algorithm/algo-instance/name";
      }
      description
        "Invalid entry.";
    }
    leaf-list added-entry {
      type leafref {
        path "/br-instances/algorithm/algo-instance/name";
      }
      description
        "Added entry.";
    }
    leaf-list modified-entry {
      type leafref {
        path "/br-instances/algorithm/algo-instance/name";
      }
      description
        "Modified entry.";
    }
  }
}

<CODE ENDS>
```

[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#commons-softwire-elements}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Common Softwire Element Groups YANG Module](#name-common-softwire-element-gro){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-common-softwire-element-gro}

This module imports typedefs from
\[[RFC6991](#RFC6991){.xref}\].[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

The following YANG module contains definitions that are used by both the
softwire CE and softwire BR YANG modules.[¶](#section-8-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-8-3}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-yang}
<CODE BEGINS> file "ietf-softwire-common@2019-11-16.yang"

module ietf-softwire-common {
  yang-version 1.1;
  namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-common";
  prefix softwire-common;

  import ietf-inet-types {
    prefix inet;
    reference 
      "RFC 6991: Common YANG Data Types, Section 4";
  }
  import ietf-yang-types {
    prefix yang;
    reference 
      "RFC 6991: Common YANG Data Types, Section 3";
  }

  organization
    "IETF Softwire Working Group";
  contact
    "WG Web:   <https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/softwire/>
     WG List:  <mailto:softwire@ietf.org>

     Author:  Qi Sun 
              <mailto:sunqi.ietf@gmail.com>

     Author:  Linhui Sun 
              <mailto:lh.sunlinh@gmail.com>

     Author:  Yong Cui 
              <mailto:yong@csnet1.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn>

     Editor:  Ian Farrer 
              <mailto:ian.farrer@telekom.de>

     Author:  Sladjana Zoric 
              <mailto:sladjana.zoric@telekom.de>

     Editor:  Mohamed Boucadair 
              <mailto:mohamed.boucadair@orange.com>

     Author:  Rajiv Asati 
               <mailto:rajiva@cisco.com>";
  description
    "This document defines a YANG module defining types
     common to all A+P modules. 

     Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
     authors of the code.  All rights reserved.

     Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
     without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject
     to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License
     set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
     Relating to IETF Documents
     (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).

     This version of this YANG module is part of RFC 8676; see
     the RFC itself for full legal notices.";

  revision 2019-11-16 {
    description
      "Initial revision.";
    reference
      "RFC 8676: YANG Modules for IPv4-in-IPv6 Address plus Port
                 (A+P) Softwires";
  }

  feature map-e {
    description
      "MAP-E is an IPv6 transition mechanism for transporting IPv4
       packets across an IPv6 network using IP encapsulation.  MAP-E
       allows for a reduction of the amount of centralized state 
       using rules to express IPv4/IPv6 address mappings.  This 
       introduces an algorithmic relationship between the IPv6 
       subnet and IPv4 address.

       This feature indicates that the network element can function
       as one or more MAP-E softwire instances.";
    reference 
      "RFC 7597: Mapping of Address and Port with Encapsulation
       (MAP-E)";
  }

  feature map-t {
    description
      "MAP-T is an IPv6 transition mechanism for transporting IPv4
       packets across an IPv6 network using IP translation.  It 
       leverages a double stateless NAT64-based solution as well as 
       the stateless algorithmic address and transport layer 
       port mapping algorithm defined for MAP-E.

       This feature indicates that the network element can function
       as one or more MAP-T softwire instances.";
    reference 
      "RFC 7599: Mapping of Address and Port using Translation 
       (MAP-T)";
  }

  /*
   * Groupings
   */

  grouping algorithm-instance {
    description
      "A collection of parameters that is used for MAP-E/MAP-T.";
    leaf enable {
      type boolean;
      description
        "Enable/disable an individual MAP-E or MAP-T rule.";
    }
    container algo-versioning {
      description
        "Version number for this algorithm instance";
      leaf version {
        type uint64;
        description
          "A version number for the mapping algorithm 
           rules provided to the algorithm instance";
      }
      leaf date {
        type yang:date-and-time;
        description
          "Timestamp when the algorithm instance was activated.

           An algorithm instance may be provided with mapping 
           rules that may change in time (for example, increase
           the size of the port set).  When a party who is the victim
           of abuse presents an external IP address/port, the version
           of the algorithm is important because depending on
           the version, a distinct customer may be identified.

           The timestamp is used as a key to find the appropriate
           algorithm that was put into effect when an abuse 
           occurred.";
        reference
          "RFC 7422: Deterministic Address Mapping to Reduce
                     Logging in Carrier-Grade NAT Deployments";
      }
    }
    choice data-plane {
      description
        "Selects MAP-E (encapsulation) or MAP-T
         (translation)";
      case encapsulation {
        if-feature "map-e";
        description
          "encapsulation for MAP-E";
        leaf br-ipv6-addr {
          type inet:ipv6-address;
          mandatory true;
          description
            "The IPv6 address of the MAP-E BR.";
        }
      }
      case translation {
        if-feature "map-t";
        description
          "translation for MAP-T";
        leaf dmr-ipv6-prefix {
          type inet:ipv6-prefix;
          description
            "The IPv6 prefix of the MAP-T BR.";
        }
      }
    }
    leaf ea-len {
      type uint8;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "Embedded Address (EA) bits are the IPv4 EA-bits in the IPv6
         address identifying an IPv4 prefix/address (or part thereof) 
         or a shared IPv4 address (or part thereof) and a port-set
         identifier.  The length of the EA-bits is defined as part of
         a MAP rule for a MAP domain.";
    }
    leaf rule-ipv6-prefix {
      type inet:ipv6-prefix;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "The Rule IPv6 prefix defined in the mapping rule.";
    }
    leaf rule-ipv4-prefix {
      type inet:ipv4-prefix;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "The Rule IPv4 prefix defined in the mapping rule.";
    }
    leaf forwarding {
      type boolean;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "This parameter specifies whether the rule may be used for
         forwarding; if set, this rule is used as a Forwarding
         Mapping Rule (FMR); if not set, this rule is a Basic
         Mapping Rule (BMR) only and must not be used for
         forwarding.";
    }
  }

  grouping traffic-stat {
    description
      "Traffic statistics";
    leaf sent-ipv4-packets {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Number of decapsulated and forwarded IPv4 packets.
               
         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf sent-ipv4-bytes {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Decapsulated/translated IPv4 traffic sent, in bytes.
              
         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf sent-ipv6-packets {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Number of encapsulated IPv6 packets sent.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf sent-ipv6-bytes {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Encapsulated IPv6 traffic sent, in bytes.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf rcvd-ipv4-packets {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Number of IPv4 packets received.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf rcvd-ipv4-bytes {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "IPv4 traffic received, in bytes.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf rcvd-ipv6-packets {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Number of IPv4-in-IPv6 packets received.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf rcvd-ipv6-bytes {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "IPv4-in-IPv6 traffic received, in bytes.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf dropped-ipv4-packets {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Number of IPv4 packets dropped at the
         Internet-facing interface.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf dropped-ipv4-bytes {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "IPv4 traffic dropped at the Internet-facing
         interface, in bytes.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf dropped-ipv6-packets {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Number of IPv4-in-IPv6 packets dropped.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf dropped-ipv6-bytes {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "IPv4-in-IPv6 traffic dropped, in bytes.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf dropped-ipv4-fragments {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Number of fragmented IPv4 packets dropped.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf dropped-ipv4-fragment-bytes {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Fragmented IPv4 traffic dropped, in bytes.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf ipv6-fragments-reassembled {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Number of IPv6 fragments successfully reassembled.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf ipv6-fragments-bytes-reassembled {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "IPv6 fragments successfully reassembled, in bytes.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf out-icmpv4-error-packets {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Internally generated ICMPv4 error packets.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf out-icmpv4-error-bytes {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Internally generated ICMPv4 error messages, in bytes.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf out-icmpv6-error-packets {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Internally generated ICMPv6 error packets.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
    leaf out-icmpv6-error-bytes {
      type yang:zero-based-counter64;
      description
        "Internally generated ICMPv6 error messages, in bytes.

         Discontinuities in the value of this counter can occur
         at re-initialization of the management system and at
         other times as indicated by the value of
         'discontinuity-time'.";
    }
  }
}

<CODE ENDS>
```

[¶](#section-8-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#security}
::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

The YANG modules defined in this document are designed to be accessed
via network management protocols such as NETCONF
\[[RFC6241](#RFC6241){.xref}\] or RESTCONF
\[[RFC8040](#RFC8040){.xref}\]. The lowest NETCONF layer is the secure
transport layer, and the mandatory-to-implement secure transport is
Secure Shell (SSH) \[[RFC6242](#RFC6242){.xref}\]. The lowest RESTCONF
layer is HTTPS, and the mandatory-to-implement secure transport is TLS
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\].[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

The Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM)
\[[RFC8341](#RFC8341){.xref}\] provides the means to restrict access for
particular NETCONF or RESTCONF users to a preconfigured subset of all
available NETCONF or RESTCONF protocol operations and
content.[¶](#section-9-2){.pilcrow}

All data nodes defined in the YANG modules which can be created,
modified, and deleted (i.e., config true, which is the default) are
considered sensitive. Write operations (e.g., edit-config) to these data
nodes without proper protection can have a negative effect on network
operations. An attacker who is able to access the BR can undertake
various attacks, such as:[¶](#section-9-3){.pilcrow}

-   [Setting the value of \'br-ipv6-addr\' on the CE to point to an
    illegitimate BR so that it can intercept all the traffic sent by a
    CE. Illegitimately intercepting users\' traffic is an attack with
    severe implications on
    privacy.[¶](#section-9-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-4.1}
-   [Setting the MTU to a low value, which may increase the number of
    fragments
    (\'softwire-payload-mtu\').[¶](#section-9-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-4.2}
-   [Disabling hairpinning (i.e., setting \'enable-hairpinning\' to
    \'false\') to prevent communications between
    CEs.[¶](#section-9-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-4.3}
-   [Setting \'softwire-num-max\' to an arbitrary high value, which may
    be exploited by a misbehaving user to perform a DoS on the binding
    BR by mounting a massive number of
    softwires.[¶](#section-9-4.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-4.4}
-   [Setting \'icmpv4-rate\' or \'icmpv6-rate\' to a low value, which
    may lead to the deactivation of ICMP messages
    handling.[¶](#section-9-4.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-4.5}
-   [Instructing the BR to install entries, which, in turn, will induce
    a DDoS attack by means of the notifications generated by the BR.
    This DDoS can be softened by defining a notification interval, but
    given that this interval parameter can be disabled or set to a low
    value by the misbehaving entity, the same problem will be
    observed.[¶](#section-9-4.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-4.6}

Some of the readable data nodes in this YANG module may be considered
sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments. It is thus
important to control read access (e.g., via get, get-config, or
notification) to these data nodes. These subtrees and data nodes can be
misused to track the activity of a host:[¶](#section-9-5){.pilcrow}

-   [the binding Table
    (/br-instances/binding/bind-instance/binding-table)[¶](#section-9-6.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-6.1}
-   [the algorithm configuration
    (/br-instances/algorithm/algo-instance/)[¶](#section-9-6.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-6.2}

Security considerations related to lw4o6, MAP-T, and MAP-E are discussed
in \[[RFC7596](#RFC7596){.xref}\], \[[RFC7597](#RFC7597){.xref}\], and
\[[RFC7599](#RFC7599){.xref}\] respectively.[¶](#section-9-7){.pilcrow}

Security considerations given in \[[RFC7950](#RFC7950){.xref}\] are also
applicable here.[¶](#section-9-8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#iana}
::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has assigned the following new tunnel type under the tunnelType
subregistry of the \"ifType Definitions\" registry maintained in the SMI
Numbers registry
\[[TUNNELTYPE-IANA-REGISTRY](#TUNNELTYPE-IANA-REGISTRY){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-10-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-10-2.1}

    Decimal:
    :   18[¶](#section-10-2.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    Name:
    :   aplusp[¶](#section-10-2.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    Description:
    :   A+P encapsulation[¶](#section-10-2.1.1.6){.pilcrow}

    Reference:
    :   \[RFC6346\][¶](#section-10-2.1.1.8){.pilcrow}
    :::

IANA has registered the following in the \"ns\" subregistry within the
\"IETF XML Registry\"
\[[RFC3688](#RFC3688){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-10-3){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-10-4.1}

    URI:
    :   urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-ce[¶](#section-10-4.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    Registrant Contact:
    :   The IESG.[¶](#section-10-4.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    XML:
    :   N/A; the requested URI is an XML
        namespace.[¶](#section-10-4.1.1.6){.pilcrow}
    :::

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ::: {#section-10-5.1}

    URI:
    :   urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-br[¶](#section-10-5.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    Registrant Contact:
    :   The IESG.[¶](#section-10-5.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    XML:
    :   N/A; the requested URI is an XML
        namespace.[¶](#section-10-5.1.1.6){.pilcrow}
    :::

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ::: {#section-10-6.1}

    URI:
    :   urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-common[¶](#section-10-6.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    Registrant Contact:
    :   The IESG.[¶](#section-10-6.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    XML:
    :   N/A; the requested URI is an XML
        namespace.[¶](#section-10-6.1.1.6){.pilcrow}
    :::

IANA has registered the following YANG modules in the \"YANG Module
Names\" subregistry \[[RFC6020](#RFC6020){.xref}\] within the \"YANG
Parameters\" registry.[¶](#section-10-7){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-10-8.1}

    name:
    :   ietf-softwire-ce[¶](#section-10-8.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    namespace:
    :   urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-ce[¶](#section-10-8.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    prefix:
    :   softwire-ce[¶](#section-10-8.1.1.6){.pilcrow}

    reference:
    :   RFC 8676[¶](#section-10-8.1.1.8){.pilcrow}
    :::

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ::: {#section-10-9.1}

    name:
    :   ietf-softwire-br[¶](#section-10-9.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    namespace:
    :   urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-br[¶](#section-10-9.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    prefix:
    :   softwire-br[¶](#section-10-9.1.1.6){.pilcrow}

    reference:
    :   RFC 8676[¶](#section-10-9.1.1.8){.pilcrow}
    :::

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ::: {#section-10-10.1}

    name:
    :   ietf-softwire-common[¶](#section-10-10.1.1.2){.pilcrow}

    namespace:
    :   urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-common[¶](#section-10-10.1.1.4){.pilcrow}

    prefix:
    :   softwire-common[¶](#section-10-10.1.1.6){.pilcrow}

    reference:
    :   RFC 8676[¶](#section-10-10.1.1.8){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-11 .section}
## [11.](#section-11){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-11.1 .section}
### [11.1.](#section-11.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC3688\]
:   [Mealling, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The IETF XML Registry\"]{.refTitle},
    [BCP 81]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 3688]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3688]{.seriesInfo}, January 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3688>\>.

\[RFC6020\]
:   [Bjorklund, M., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"YANG - A Data Modeling Language
    for the Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6020]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6020]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2010, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6020>\>.

\[RFC6241\]
:   [Enns, R., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Bjorklund, M., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Schoenwaelder, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, and A. Bierman,
    Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Network Configuration Protocol
    (NETCONF)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6241]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6241]{.seriesInfo}, June 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6241>\>.

\[RFC6242\]
:   [Wasserman, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using the NETCONF Protocol over
    Secure Shell (SSH)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6242]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6242]{.seriesInfo}, June 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6242>\>.

\[RFC6991\]
:   [Schoenwaelder, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Common YANG Data
    Types\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6991]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6991]{.seriesInfo}, July 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6991>\>.

\[RFC7224\]
:   [Bjorklund, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"IANA Interface Type YANG
    Module\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7224]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7224]{.seriesInfo}, May 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7224>\>.

\[RFC7596\]
:   [Cui, Y.]{.refAuthor}[, Sun, Q.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Boucadair, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Tsou, T.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Lee, Y.]{.refAuthor}[, and I. Farrer]{.refAuthor}, [\"Lightweight
    4over6: An Extension to the Dual-Stack Lite
    Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7596]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7596]{.seriesInfo}, July 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7596>\>.

\[RFC7597\]
:   [Troan, O., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Dec, W.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Li, X.]{.refAuthor}[, Bao, C.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Matsushima, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Murakami, T.]{.refAuthor}[, and T.
    Taylor, Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Mapping of Address and Port with
    Encapsulation (MAP-E)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7597]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7597]{.seriesInfo}, July 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7597>\>.

\[RFC7598\]
:   [Mrugalski, T.]{.refAuthor}[, Troan, O.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Farrer, I.]{.refAuthor}[, Perreault, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Dec, W.]{.refAuthor}[, Bao, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Yeh, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    and X. Deng]{.refAuthor}, [\"DHCPv6 Options for Configuration of
    Softwire Address and Port-Mapped Clients\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7598]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7598]{.seriesInfo}, July 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7598>\>.

\[RFC7599\]
:   [Li, X.]{.refAuthor}[, Bao, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Dec, W.,
    Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Troan, O.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Matsushima, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and T. Murakami]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Mapping of Address and Port using Translation
    (MAP-T)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7599]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7599]{.seriesInfo}, July 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7599>\>.

\[RFC7950\]
:   [Bjorklund, M., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling
    Language\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7950]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7950]{.seriesInfo}, August 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7950>\>.

\[RFC8040\]
:   [Bierman, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Bjorklund, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and K.
    Watsen]{.refAuthor}, [\"RESTCONF Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8040]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8040]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8040>\>.

\[RFC8341\]
:   [Bierman, A.]{.refAuthor}[ and M. Bjorklund]{.refAuthor}, [\"Network
    Configuration Access Control Model\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    91]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8341]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8341]{.seriesInfo}, March 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8341>\>.

\[RFC8343\]
:   [Bjorklund, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"A YANG Data Model for Interface
    Management\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8343]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8343]{.seriesInfo}, March 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8343>\>.

\[RFC8446\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Transport Layer Security (TLS)
    Protocol Version 1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8446]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8446]{.seriesInfo}, August 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8446>\>.

\[RFC8675\]
:   [Boucadair, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Farrer, I.]{.refAuthor}[, and R.
    Asati]{.refAuthor}, [\"A YANG Data Model for Tunnel Interface
    Types\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8675]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8675]{.seriesInfo}, November 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8675>\>.

\[TUNNELTYPE-IANA-REGISTRY\]
:   [IANA]{.refAuthor}, [\"Structure of Management Information (SMI)
    Numbers (MIB Module Registrations)\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.iana.org/assignments/smi-numbers>\>.
:::

::: {#section-11.2 .section}
### [11.2.](#section-11.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC4213\]
:   [Nordmark, E.]{.refAuthor}[ and R. Gilligan]{.refAuthor}, [\"Basic
    Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4213]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4213]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2005, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4213>\>.

\[RFC6333\]
:   [Durand, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Droms, R.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Woodyatt, J.]{.refAuthor}[, and Y. Lee]{.refAuthor}, [\"Dual-Stack
    Lite Broadband Deployments Following IPv4 Exhaustion\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 6333]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6333]{.seriesInfo}, August
    2011, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6333>\>.

\[RFC6346\]
:   [Bush, R., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Address plus Port (A+P) Approach
    to the IPv4 Address Shortage\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6346]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC6346]{.seriesInfo}, August 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6346>\>.

\[RFC7422\]
:   [Donley, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Grundemann, C.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Sarawat, V.]{.refAuthor}[, Sundaresan, K.]{.refAuthor}[, and O.
    Vautrin]{.refAuthor}, [\"Deterministic Address Mapping to Reduce
    Logging in Carrier-Grade NAT Deployments\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7422]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7422]{.seriesInfo}, December
    2014, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7422>\>.

\[RFC8340\]
:   [Bjorklund, M.]{.refAuthor}[ and L. Berger, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"YANG Tree Diagrams\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 215]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8340]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8340]{.seriesInfo}, March 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8340>\>.

\[RFC8342\]
:   [Bjorklund, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Schoenwaelder, J.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Shafer, P.]{.refAuthor}[, Watsen, K.]{.refAuthor}[, and R.
    Wilton]{.refAuthor}, [\"Network Management Datastore Architecture
    (NMDA)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8342]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8342]{.seriesInfo}, March 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8342>\>.

\[RFC8344\]
:   [Bjorklund, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"A YANG Data Model for IP
    Management\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8344]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8344]{.seriesInfo}, March 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8344>\>.

\[RFC8349\]
:   [Lhotka, L.]{.refAuthor}[, Lindem, A.]{.refAuthor}[, and Y.
    Qu]{.refAuthor}, [\"A YANG Data Model for Routing Management (NMDA
    Version)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8349]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8349]{.seriesInfo}, March 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8349>\>.

\[RFC8512\]
:   [Boucadair, M., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Sivakumar, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Jacquenet, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Vinapamula, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and Q.
    Wu]{.refAuthor}, [\"A YANG Module for Network Address Translation
    (NAT) and Network Prefix Translation (NPT)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8512]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8512]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2019, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8512>\>.

\[RFC8513\]
:   [Boucadair, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Jacquenet, C.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Sivakumar]{.refAuthor}, [\"A YANG Data Model for Dual-Stack Lite
    (DS-Lite)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8513]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8513]{.seriesInfo}, January 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8513>\>.
:::
:::

::: {#examples}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Appendix A.](#section-appendix.a){.section-number .selfRef} [Configuration Examples](#name-configuration-examples){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-configuration-examples}

The following sections provide examples of how the softwire YANG modules
can be used for configuring softwire
elements.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#lw4o6-example}
::: {#section-a.1 .section}
## [A.1.](#section-a.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Configuration Example for a lw4o6 BR Binding-Table](#name-configuration-example-for-a){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-configuration-example-for-a}

The lwAFTR maintains an address binding table that contains the
following 3-tuples:[¶](#section-a.1-1){.pilcrow}

-   [IPv6 Address for a single
    lwB4[¶](#section-a.1-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.1-2.1}
-   [Public IPv4
    Address[¶](#section-a.1-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.1-2.2}
-   [Restricted
    port-set[¶](#section-a.1-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.1-2.3}

The entry has two functions: the IPv6 encapsulation of inbound IPv4
packets destined to the lwB4 and the validation of outbound IPv4-in-IPv6
packets received from the lwB4 for
decapsulation.[¶](#section-a.1-3){.pilcrow}

Consider an example for the following lw4o6 binding table
entry:[¶](#section-a.1-4){.pilcrow}

lwB4 Binding IPv6 Address:
:   2001:db8::1[¶](#section-a.1-5.2){.pilcrow}

lwB4 Binding IPv4 Address:
:   192.0.2.1[¶](#section-a.1-5.4){.pilcrow}

lwB4 PSID:
:   0x34[¶](#section-a.1-5.6){.pilcrow}

lwB4 PSID Length
:   8[¶](#section-a.1-5.8){.pilcrow}

BR IPv6 Address:
:   2001:db8:1::2[¶](#section-a.1-5.10){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-lw4o6-binding-table-configu}

::: {#lw4o6-br-example-xml}
::: {#section-a.1-6.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
    <br-instances>
      <binding>
          <bind-instance>
            <name>mybinding-instance</name>
            <binding-table>
              <binding-entry>
                <binding-ipv6info>2001:db8::1</binding-ipv6info>
                <binding-ipv4-addr>192.0.2.1</binding-ipv4-addr>
                <port-set>
                  <psid>52</psid>
                  <psid-len>8</psid-len>
                </port-set>
                <br-ipv6-addr>2001:db8:1::2</br-ipv6-addr>
              </binding-entry>
            </binding-table>
            <softwire-num-max>1024</softwire-num-max>
            <softwire-path-mru>1540</softwire-path-mru>
            <softwire-payload-mtu>1500</softwire-payload-mtu>
          </bind-instance>
      </binding>
    </br-instances> 
```

[¶](#section-a.1-6.1){.pilcrow}
:::

[Figure 3](#figure-3){.selfRef}: [lw4o6 Binding Table Configuration
XML](#name-lw4o6-binding-table-configu){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#map-e-example}
::: {#section-a.2 .section}
## [A.2.](#section-a.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Configuration Example for a MAP-E BR](#name-configuration-example-for-a-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-configuration-example-for-a-}

A MAP-E BR is configured with forward mapping rules for the CEs it is
serving. In this example (taken from \[[RFC7597](#RFC7597){.xref}\],
Appendix A, Example 2), the following parameters are
required:[¶](#section-a.2-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Rule IPv6 Prefix[¶](#section-a.2-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-2.1}
-   [Rule IPv4 Prefix[¶](#section-a.2-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-2.2}
-   [Rule EA-bit bit
    length[¶](#section-a.2-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-2.3}
-   [IPv6 Address of
    MAP-BR[¶](#section-a.2-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-2.4}

The mapping rule has two functions: identifying the destination CE IPv6
address for encapsulating inbound IPv4 packets and the validation of
outbound IPv4-in-IPv6 packets received from the CE for
de-capsulation.[¶](#section-a.2-3){.pilcrow}

The transport type for the data plane also needs to be configured for
encapsulation to enable MAP-E and forwarding needs to be
enabled.[¶](#section-a.2-4){.pilcrow}

Consider an example for the following MAP-E Forwarding Mapping
Rule:[¶](#section-a.2-5){.pilcrow}

Data plane:
:   encapsulation[¶](#section-a.2-6.2){.pilcrow}

Rule IPv6 Prefix:
:   2001:db8::/40[¶](#section-a.2-6.4){.pilcrow}

Rule IPv4 Prefix:
:   192.0.2.0/24[¶](#section-a.2-6.6){.pilcrow}

Rule EA-bit Length:
:   16[¶](#section-a.2-6.8){.pilcrow}

BR IPv6 Address:
:   2001:db8:ffff::1[¶](#section-a.2-6.10){.pilcrow}

[Figure 4](#map-e-example-xml){.xref} provides the example MAP-E BR
configuration xml.[¶](#section-a.2-7){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-map-e-fmr-configuration-xml}

::: {#map-e-example-xml}
::: {#section-a.2-8.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
    <br-instances>
      <algorithm>
        <algo-instance>
          <name>myalgo-instance</name>
          <encapsulation>
            <br-ipv6-addr>2001:db8:ffff::1</br-ipv6-addr>
          </encapsulation>
          <ea-len>16</ea-len>
          <rule-ipv4-prefix>192.0.2.0/24</rule-ipv4-prefix>
          <rule-ipv6-prefix>2001:db8::/40</rule-ipv6-prefix>
          <forwarding>true</forwarding>
          <port-set>
            <psid-offset>6</psid-offset>
            <psid-len>8</psid-len>
          </port-set>
        </algo-instance>
      </algorithm>
    </br-instances>       
```

[¶](#section-a.2-8.1){.pilcrow}
:::

[Figure 4](#figure-4){.selfRef}: [MAP-E FMR Configuration
XML](#name-map-e-fmr-configuration-xml){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#lw4o6-ce-example}
::: {#section-a.3 .section}
## [A.3.](#section-a.3){.section-number .selfRef} [lw4o6 CE Configuration Example](#name-lw4o6-ce-configuration-exam){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-lw4o6-ce-configuration-exam}

This section provides XML examples for configuring a lw4o6 CE. Examples
for routing and NAT44 are also provided for
convenience.[¶](#section-a.3-1){.pilcrow}

Consider an example for the following lw4o6 CE
configuration:[¶](#section-a.3-2){.pilcrow}

lwB4 Binding IPv6 Address:
:   2001:db8::1[¶](#section-a.3-3.2){.pilcrow}

lwB4 Binding IPv4 Address:
:   192.0.2.1[¶](#section-a.3-3.4){.pilcrow}

lwB4 PSID:
:   0x34[¶](#section-a.3-3.6){.pilcrow}

lwB4 PSID Length
:   8[¶](#section-a.3-3.8){.pilcrow}

BR IPv6 Address:
:   2001:db8:1::2[¶](#section-a.3-3.10){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-lw4o6-ce-configuration-xml}

::: {#lw4o6-ce-example-xml}
::: {#section-a.3-4.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
<config xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:netconf:base:1.0">
  <interfaces xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-interfaces">
    <interface>
      <name>lw4o6-wan</name>
      <type>iana-tunnel-type:aplusp</type>
      <br-ipv6-addr
        xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-ce">
        2001:db8:1::2
      </br-ipv6-addr>
      <binding-ipv6info
        xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-softwire-ce">
        2001:db8::1
      </binding-ipv6info>
    </interface>
  </interfaces>
</config>
    
```

[¶](#section-a.3-4.1){.pilcrow}
:::

[Figure 5](#figure-5){.selfRef}: [lw4o6 CE Configuration
XML](#name-lw4o6-ce-configuration-xml){.selfRef}
:::

In the example depicted in [Figure 5](#lw4o6-ce-example-xml){.xref}, the
interface name is defined for the softwire tunnel. This name is then
referenced by the routing configuration for the IPv4 route. [Figure
6](#lw4o6-ce-routing-example-xml){.xref} provides an example
configuration for the CE\'s IPv4 routing using the YANG module described
in \[[RFC8349](#RFC8349){.xref}\].[¶](#section-a.3-5){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-lw4o6-ce-routing-configurat}

::: {#lw4o6-ce-routing-example-xml}
::: {#section-a.3-6.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
<config xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:netconf:base:1.0">
  <routing xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-routing">
    <control-plane-protocols>
      <control-plane-protocol>
        <type>static</type>
        <name>v4</name>
        <static-routes>
          <ipv4
          xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-ipv4-unicas\
          t-routing">
            <route>
              <destination-prefix>0.0.0.0/0</destination-prefix>
              <next-hop>
                <outgoing-interface>lw4o6-wan</outgoing-interface>
              </next-hop>
            </route>
          </ipv4>
        </static-routes>
      </control-plane-protocol>
    </control-plane-protocols>
  </routing>
</config>
    
```

[¶](#section-a.3-6.1){.pilcrow}
:::

[Figure 6](#figure-6){.selfRef}: [lw4o6 CE Routing Configuration
XML](#name-lw4o6-ce-routing-configurat){.selfRef}
:::

[Figure 7](#lw4o6-ce-nat-example-xml){.xref} provides an example
configuration for the CE\'s NAPT44 function using the YANG module
described in
\[[RFC8512](#RFC8512){.xref}\].[¶](#section-a.3-7){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-lw4o6-nat-configuration-xml}

::: {#lw4o6-ce-nat-example-xml}
::: {#section-a.3-8.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
<config xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:netconf:base:1.0">
  <nat xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-nat">
   <instances>
     <instance>
       <id>1</id>
       <policy>
        <policy-id>1</policy-id>
        <external-ip-address-pool>
          <pool-id>1</pool-id>
          <external-ip-pool>192.0.2.1</external-ip-pool>
        </external-ip-address-pool>
        <port-set-restrict>
          <port-set-algo>
            <psid-offset>6</psid-offset>
            <psid-len>8</psid-len>
            <psid>52</psid>
          </port-set-algo>
        </port-set-restrict>
        <notify-pool-usage>
          <pool-id>1</pool-id>
          <high-threshold>80</high-threshold>
        </notify-pool-usage>
        </policy>
        <mapping-limits>
         <limit-per-protocol>
          <protocol-id>1</protocol-id>
          <limit>8</limit>
         </limit-per-protocol>
         <limit-per-protocol>
          <protocol-id>6</protocol-id>
          <limit>32</limit>
         </limit-per-protocol>
         <limit-per-protocol>
          <protocol-id>17</protocol-id>
          <limit>16</limit>
         </limit-per-protocol>
        </mapping-limits>
        <mapping-table>
          <mapping-entry>
            <index>1</index>
            <external-src-address>
              192.0.2.1/32
            </external-src-address>
            <internal-src-address>
              192.168.1.0/24
            </internal-src-address>
            <transport-protocol>6</transport-protocol>
          </mapping-entry>
          <mapping-entry>
            <index>2</index>
            <external-src-address>
              192.0.2.1/32
            </external-src-address>
            <internal-src-address>
              192.168.1.0/24
            </internal-src-address>
            <transport-protocol>17</transport-protocol>
          </mapping-entry>
          <mapping-entry>
            <index>3</index>
            <external-src-address>
              192.0.2.1/32
            </external-src-address>
            <internal-src-address>
              192.168.1.0/24
            </internal-src-address>
            <transport-protocol>1</transport-protocol>
          </mapping-entry>
        </mapping-table>
      </instance>
    </instances>
  </nat>
</config>
```

[¶](#section-a.3-8.1){.pilcrow}
:::

[Figure 7](#figure-7){.selfRef}: [lw4o6 NAT Configuration
XML](#name-lw4o6-nat-configuration-xml){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#acknowledgements}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

The authors would like to thank Lishan Li, Bert Wijnen, Giles Heron, Ole
Troan, Andy Wingo, and Leo Tietz for their contributions to this
work.[¶](#section-appendix.b-1){.pilcrow}

Thanks to Sheng Jiang for the
review.[¶](#section-appendix.b-2){.pilcrow}

Special thanks to Tom Petch and Martin Bjorklund for the detailed review
and suggestions.[¶](#section-appendix.b-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-appendix.c .section}
## [Contributors](#name-contributors){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-contributors}

The following individuals are
co-authors:[¶](#section-appendix.c-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-appendix.c-2 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
       Yong Cui
       Tsinghua University
       China
       Phone: +86-10-6260-3059
       Email: cuiyong@tsinghua.edu.cn

[¶](#section-appendix.c-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-appendix.c-3 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
       Qi Sun
       Tsinghua University
       China
       Phone: +86-10-6278-5822
       Email: sunqi.ietf@gmail.com

[¶](#section-appendix.c-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-appendix.c-4 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
       Linhui Sun
       Tsinghua University
       China
       Phone: +86-10-6278-5822
       Email: lh.sunlinh@gmail.com

[¶](#section-appendix.c-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-appendix.c-5 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
       Sladjana Zechlin
       Deutsche Telekom AG
       Germany
       Email: sladjana.zechlin@telekom.de

[¶](#section-appendix.c-5){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-appendix.c-6 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
       Rajiv Asati
       Cisco Systems, Inc.
       United States of America
       Email: Rajiva@cisco.com

[¶](#section-appendix.c-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-appendix.c-7 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
       Hao Wang
       Tsinghua University
       China
       Phone: +86-10-6278-5822
       Email: wangh13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

[¶](#section-appendix.c-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.d .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ian Farrer ([editor]{.role})]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Deutsche Telekom AG]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[CTO-ATI, Landgrabenweg 151]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[53227]{.postal-code} [Bonn]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Germany]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <ian.farrer@telekom.de>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mohamed Boucadair ([editor]{.role})]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Orange]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[35000]{.postal-code} [Rennes]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[France]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <mohamed.boucadair@orange.com>
:::
:::
:::
