  RFC 8688         SIP Response Code for Rejected Calls   December 2019
  ---------------- -------------------------------------- ---------------
  Burger & Nagda   Standards Track                        \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8688](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8688){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   December 2019

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    E.W. Burger
    :::

    ::: org
    Georgetown University
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    B. Nagda
    :::

    ::: org
    Massachusetts Institute of Technology
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8688 {#rfcnum}

# A Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Response Code for Rejected Calls {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document defines the 608 (Rejected) Session Initiation Protocol
(SIP) response code. This response code enables calling parties to learn
that an intermediary rejected their call attempt. No one will deliver,
and thus answer, the call. As a 6xx code, the caller will be aware that
future attempts to contact the same User Agent Server will likely fail.
The initial use case driving the need for the 608 response code is when
the intermediary is an analytics engine. In this case, the rejection is
by a machine or other process. This contrasts with the 607 (Unwanted)
SIP response code in which a human at the target User Agent Server
indicates the user did not want the call. In some jurisdictions, this
distinction is important. This document also defines the use of the
Call-Info header field in 608 responses to enable rejected callers to
contact entities that blocked their calls in error. This provides a
remediation mechanism for legal callers that find their calls
blocked.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8688>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Protocol
    Operation](#name-protocol-operation){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [Intermediary
        Operation](#name-intermediary-operation){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [JWS
        Construction](#name-jws-construction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.1){.pilcrow}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.1}
            [3.2.1](#section-3.2.1){.xref}.  [JOSE
            Header](#name-jose-header){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.2}
            [3.2.2](#section-3.2.2){.xref}.  [JWT
            Payload](#name-jwt-payload){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.3}
            [3.2.3](#section-3.2.3){.xref}.  [JWS
            Signature](#name-jws-signature){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3}
        [3.3](#section-3.3){.xref}.  [UAC
        Operation](#name-uac-operation){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.4}
        [3.4](#section-3.4){.xref}.  [Legacy
        Interoperation](#name-legacy-interoperation){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.4.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.5}
        [3.5](#section-3.5){.xref}.  [Announcement
        Requirements](#name-announcement-requirements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.5.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Examples](#name-examples){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [Full
        Exchange](#name-full-exchange){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2}
        [4.2](#section-4.2){.xref}.  [Web Site
        jCard](#name-web-site-jcard){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3}
        [4.3](#section-4.3){.xref}.  [Multi-modal
        jCard](#name-multi-modal-jcard){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.4}
        [4.4](#section-4.4){.xref}.  [Legacy
        Interoperability](#name-legacy-interoperability){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.4.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [SIP Response
        Code](#name-sip-response-code){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [SIP Feature-Capability
        Indicator](#name-sip-feature-capability-indi){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.3}
        [5.3](#section-5.3){.xref}.  [JSON Web Token
        Claim](#name-json-web-token-claim){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.4}
        [5.4](#section-5.4){.xref}.  [Call-Info
        Purpose](#name-call-info-purpose){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.4.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2}
        [7.2](#section-7.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

The IETF has been addressing numerous issues surrounding how to handle
unwanted and, depending on the jurisdiction, illegal calls
\[[RFC5039](#RFC5039){.xref}\]. Secure Telephone Identity Revisited
(STIR) \[[RFC7340](#RFC7340){.xref}\] and Signature-based Handling of
Asserted information using toKENs (SHAKEN) \[[SHAKEN](#SHAKEN){.xref}\]
address the cryptographic signing and attestation, respectively, of
signaling to ensure the integrity and authenticity of the asserted
caller identity.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

This document describes a new [Session Initiation Protocol
(SIP)](#RFC3261){.xref} \[[RFC3261](#RFC3261){.xref}\] response code,
608, which allows calling parties to learn that an intermediary rejected
their call. As described below, we need a distinct indicator to
differentiate between a user rejection and an intermediary\'s rejection
of a call. In some jurisdictions, service providers may not be permitted
to block calls, even if unwanted by the user, unless there is an
explicit user request. Moreover, users may misidentify the nature of a
caller.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

For example, a legitimate caller may call a user who finds the call to
be unwanted. However, instead of marking the call as unwanted, the user
may mark the call as illegal. With that information, an analytics engine
may determine to block all calls from that source. However, in some
jurisdictions, blocking calls from that source for other users may not
be legal. Likewise, one can envision jurisdictions that allow an
operator to block such calls, but only if there is a remediation
mechanism in place to address false
positives.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Some call-blocking services may return responses such as 604 (Does Not
Exist Anywhere). This might be a strategy to try to get a destination\'s
address removed from a calling database. However, other network elements
might also interpret this to mean the user truly does not exist, which
might result in the user not being able to receive calls from anyone,
even if they wanted to receive the calls. In many jurisdictions,
providing such false signaling is also
illegal.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

The 608 response code addresses this need of remediating falsely blocked
calls. Specifically, this code informs the SIP User Agent Client (UAC)
that an intermediary blocked the call and provides a redress mechanism
that allows callers to contact the operator of the
intermediary.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

In the current call handling ecosystem, users can explicitly reject a
call or later mark a call as being unwanted by issuing a [607 SIP
response code (Unwanted)](#RFC8197){.xref}
\[[RFC8197](#RFC8197){.xref}\]. Figures [1](#uas_reject){.xref} and
[2](#reject_ladder){.xref} show the operation of the 607 SIP response
code. The User Agent Server (UAS) indicates the call was unwanted. As
\[[RFC8197](#RFC8197){.xref}\] explains, not only does the called party
desire to reject that call, they can let their proxy know that they
consider future calls from that source unwanted. Upon receipt of the 607
response from the UAS, the proxy may send unwanted call indicators, such
as the value of the From header field and other information elements, to
a call analytics engine. For various reasons described in
\[[RFC8197](#RFC8197){.xref}\], if a network operator receives multiple
reports of unwanted calls, that may indicate that the entity placing the
calls is likely to be a source of unwanted calls for many people. As
such, other customers of the service provider may want the service
provider to automatically reject calls on their
behalf.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}

There is another value of the 607 rejection code. Presuming the proxy
forwards the response code to the UAC, the calling UAC or intervening
proxies will also learn the user is not interested in receiving calls
from that sender.[¶](#section-1-7){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-unwanted-607-call-flow}

::: {#uas_reject}
::: {#section-1-8.1 .artwork .art-text .alignCenter .art-ascii-art}
                       +-----------+
                       |   Call    |
                       | Analytics |
                       |  Engine   |
                       +-----------+
                          ^     | (likely not SIP)
                          |     v
                       +-----------+
    +-----+    607     |  Called   |    607    +-----+
    | UAC | <--------- |  Party    | <-------- | UAS |
    +-----+            |  Proxy    |           +-----+
                       +-----------+
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [Unwanted (607) Call
Flow](#name-unwanted-607-call-flow){.selfRef}
:::

For calls rejected with a 607 from a legitimate caller, receiving a 607
response code can inform the caller to stop attempting to call the user.
Moreover, if a legitimate caller believes the user is rejecting their
calls in error, they can use other channels to contact the user. For
example, if a pharmacy calls a user to let them know their prescription
is available for pickup and the user mistakenly thinks the call is
unwanted and issues a 607 response code, the pharmacy, having an
existing relationship with the customer, can send the user an email or
push a note to the pharmacist to ask the customer to consider not
rejecting their calls in the future.[¶](#section-1-9){.pilcrow}

Many systems that allow the user to mark the call unwanted (e.g., with
the 607 response code) also allow the user to change their mind and
unmark such calls. This mechanism is relatively easy to implement as the
user usually has a direct relationship with the service provider that is
blocking calls.[¶](#section-1-10){.pilcrow}

However, things become more complicated if an intermediary, such as a
third-party provider of call management services that classifies calls
based on the relative likelihood that the call is unwanted,
misidentifies the call as unwanted. [Figure 3](#cae_reject){.xref} shows
this case. Note that the UAS typically does not receive an INVITE since
the called party proxy rejects the call on behalf of the user. In this
situation, it would be beneficial for the caller to learn who rejected
the call so they can correct the
misidentification.[¶](#section-1-11){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-unwanted-607-ladder-diagram}

::: {#reject_ladder}
::: {#section-1-12.1 .artwork .art-text .alignCenter .art-call-flow}
                     +--------+         +-----------+
                     | Called |         |   Call    |
    +-----+          | Party  |         | Analytics |   +-----+
    | UAC |          | Proxy  |         |  Engine   |   | UAS |
    +-----+          +--------+         +-----------+   +-----+
       |  INVITE         |                    |            |
       | --------------> |  Is call OK?       |            |
       |                 |------------------->|            |
       |                 |                    |            |
       |                 |               Yes  |            |
       |                 |<-------------------|            |
       |                 |                    |            |
       |                 | INVITE             |            |
       |                 | ------------------------------> |
       |                 |                    |            |
       |                 |                    |       607  |
       |                 | <------------------------------ |
       |                 |                    |            |
       |                 |  Unwanted call     |            |
       |            607  | -----------------> |            |
       | <-------------- |  indicators        |            |
       |                 |                    |            |
:::

[Figure 2](#figure-2){.selfRef}: [Unwanted (607) Ladder
Diagram](#name-unwanted-607-ladder-diagram){.selfRef}
:::

[]{#name-rejected-608-call-flow}

::: {#cae_reject}
::: {#section-1-13.1 .artwork .art-text .alignCenter .art-ascii-art}
                          +-----------+
                          |   Call    |
                          | Analytics |
                          |  Engine   |
                          +-----------+
                             ^     | (likely not SIP)
                             |     v
                          +-----------+
       +-----+    608     |  Called   |           +-----+
       | UAC | <--------- |  Party    |           | UAS |
       +-----+            |  Proxy    |           +-----+
                          +-----------+
:::

[Figure 3](#figure-3){.selfRef}: [Rejected (608) Call
Flow](#name-rejected-608-call-flow){.selfRef}
:::

In this situation, one might consider having the intermediary use the
607 response code. 607 indicates to the caller that the subscriber does
not want the call. However, \[[RFC8197](#RFC8197){.xref}\] specifies
that one of the uses of 607 is to inform analytics engines that a user
(human) has rejected a call. The problem here is that network elements
downstream from the intermediary might interpret the 607 as coming from
a user (human) who has marked the call as unwanted, as opposed to coming
from an algorithm using statistics or machine learning to reject the
call. An algorithm can be vulnerable to the base-rate fallacy
\[[BaseRate](#BaseRate){.xref}\] rejecting the call. In other words,
those downstream entities should not rely on another entity \"deciding\"
the call is unwanted. By distinguishing between a (human) user rejection
and an intermediary engine\'s statistical rejection, a downstream
network element that sees a 607 response code can weigh it as a human
rejection in its call analytics, versus deciding whether to consider a
608 at all, and if so, weighing it
appropriately.[¶](#section-1-14){.pilcrow}

It is useful for blocked callers to have a redress mechanism. One can
imagine that some jurisdictions will require it. However, we must be
mindful that most of the calls that intermediaries block will, in fact,
be illegal and eligible for blocking. Thus, providing alternate contact
information for a user would be counterproductive to protecting that
user from illegal communications. This is another reason we do not
propose to simply allow alternate contact information in a 607 response
message.[¶](#section-1-15){.pilcrow}

Why do we not use the same mechanism an analytics service provider
offers their customers? Specifically, why not have the analytics service
provider allow the called party to correct a call blocked in error? The
reason is that while there is an existing relationship between the
customer (called party) and the analytics service provider, it is
unlikely there is a relationship between the caller and the analytics
service provider. Moreover, there are numerous call blocking providers
in the ecosystem. Therefore, we need a mechanism for indicating an
intermediary rejected a call that also provides contact information for
the operator of that intermediary without exposing the target user\'s
contact information.[¶](#section-1-16){.pilcrow}

The protocol described in this document uses existing SIP protocol
mechanisms for specifying the redress mechanism. In the Call-Info header
field passed back to the UAC, we send additional information specifying
a redress address. We choose to encode the redress address using
[jCard](#RFC7095){.xref} \[[RFC7095](#RFC7095){.xref}\]. As we will see
later in this document, this information needs to have its own
application-layer integrity protection. Thus, we use jCard rather than
[vCard](#RFC6350){.xref} \[[RFC6350](#RFC6350){.xref}\], as we have a
marshaling mechanism for creating a JavaScript Object Notation
[(JSON)](#RFC8259){.xref} \[[RFC8259](#RFC8259){.xref}\] object, such as
a jCard, and a standard integrity format for such an object, namely,
JSON Web Signature [(JWS)](#RFC7515){.xref}
\[[RFC7515](#RFC7515){.xref}\]. The SIP community is familiar with this
concept as it is the mechanism used by [STIR](#RFC8224){.xref}
\[[RFC8224](#RFC8224){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-17){.pilcrow}

Integrity protecting the jCard with a cryptographic signature might seem
unnecessary at first, but it is essential to preventing potential
network attacks. [Section 6](#Security){.xref} describes the attack and
why we sign the jCard in more detail.[¶](#section-1-18){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Protocol Operation](#name-protocol-operation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-protocol-operation}

This section uses the term \"intermediary\" to mean the entity that acts
as a SIP UAS on behalf of the user in the network as opposed to the
user\'s UAS (usually, but not necessarily, their phone). The
intermediary could be a back-to-back user agent (B2BUA) or a SIP
Proxy.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

[Figure 4](#cae_ladder){.xref} shows an overview of the call flow for a
rejected call.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-rejected-608-ladder-diagram}

::: {#cae_ladder}
::: {#section-3-3.1 .artwork .art-text .alignCenter .art-call-flow}
                      +--------+         +-----------+
                      | Called |         |   Call    |
     +-----+          | Party  |         | Analytics |   +-----+
     | UAC |          | Proxy  |         |  Engine   |   | UAS |
     +-----+          +--------+         +-----------+   +-----+
        |  INVITE         |                    |            |
        | --------------> |  Is call OK?       |            |
        |                 |------------------->|            |
        |                 |                    |            |
        |                 |               Yes  |            |
        |                 |<-------------------|            |
        |                 |                    |            |
        |                 | INVITE             |            |
        |                 | ------------------------------> |
        |                 |                    |            |
        |                 |                    |       607  |
        |                 | <------------------------------ |
        |                 |                    |            |
        |                 |  Unwanted call     |            |
        |            607  | -----------------> |            |
        | <-------------- |  indicators        |            |
        |                 |                    |            |
:::

[Figure 4](#figure-4){.selfRef}: [Rejected (608) Ladder
Diagram](#name-rejected-608-ladder-diagram){.selfRef}
:::

::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Intermediary Operation](#name-intermediary-operation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-intermediary-operation}

An intermediary [MAY]{.bcp14} issue the 608 response code in a failure
response for an INVITE, MESSAGE, SUBSCRIBE, or other out-of-dialog
[SIP](#RFC3261){.xref} \[[RFC3261](#RFC3261){.xref}\] request to
indicate that an intermediary rejected the offered communication as
unwanted by the user. An intermediary [MAY]{.bcp14} issue the 608 as the
value of the \"cause\" parameter of a SIP reason-value in a Reason
header field
\[[RFC3326](#RFC3326){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

If an intermediary issues a 608 code and there are no indicators the
calling party will use the contents of the Call-Info header field for
malicious purposes (see [Section 6](#Security){.xref}), the intermediary
[MUST]{.bcp14} include a Call-Info header field in the
response.[¶](#section-3.1-2){.pilcrow}

If there is a Call-Info header field, it [MUST]{.bcp14} have the
\"purpose\" parameter of \"jwscard\". The value of the Call-Info header
field [MUST]{.bcp14} refer to a valid JSON Web Signature (JWS)
\[[RFC7515](#RFC7515){.xref}\] encoding of a [jCard](#RFC7095){.xref}
\[[RFC7095](#RFC7095){.xref}\] object. The following section describes
the construction of the JWS.[¶](#section-3.1-3){.pilcrow}

Proxies need to be mindful that a downstream intermediary may reject the
attempt with a 608 while other paths may still be in progress. In this
situation, the requirements stated in [Section
16.7](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3261#section-16.7){.relref} of
\[[RFC3261](#RFC3261){.xref}\] apply. Specifically, the proxy should
cancel pending transactions and must not create any new branches. Note
this is not a new requirement but simply pointing out the existing 6xx
protocol mechanism in SIP.[¶](#section-3.1-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [JWS Construction](#name-jws-construction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-jws-construction}

The intermediary constructs the JWS of the jCard as
follows.[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-3.2.1 .section}
#### [3.2.1.](#section-3.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [JOSE Header](#name-jose-header){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-jose-header}

The Javascript Object Signing and Encryption (JOSE) header
[MUST]{.bcp14} include the typ, alg, and x5u parameters from
[JWS](#RFC7515){.xref} \[[RFC7515](#RFC7515){.xref}\]. The typ parameter
[MUST]{.bcp14} have the value \"vcard+json\". Implementations
[MUST]{.bcp14} support ES256 as JSON Web Algorithms (JWA)
\[[RFC7518](#RFC7518){.xref}\] defines it and [MAY]{.bcp14} support
other registered signature algorithms. Finally, the x5u parameter
[MUST]{.bcp14} be a URI that resolves to the public key certificate
corresponding to the key used to digitally sign the
JWS.[¶](#section-3.2.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#JWT}
::: {#section-3.2.2 .section}
#### [3.2.2.](#section-3.2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [JWT Payload](#name-jwt-payload){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-jwt-payload}

The payload contains two JSON values. The first JSON Web Token (JWT)
claim that [MUST]{.bcp14} be present is the [\"iat\" (issued at)
claim](#RFC7519){.xref} \[[RFC7519](#RFC7519){.xref}\]. The \"iat\"
[MUST]{.bcp14} be set to the date and time of the issuance of the 608
response. This mandatory component protects the response from replay
attacks.[¶](#section-3.2.2-1){.pilcrow}

The second JWT claim that [MUST]{.bcp14} be present is the \"jcard\"
claim. The value of the [jcard](#RFC7095){.xref}
\[[RFC7095](#RFC7095){.xref}\] claim is a JSON array conforming to the
JSON jCard data format defined in \[[RFC7095](#RFC7095){.xref}\].
[Section 5.3](#JWT-IANA){.xref} describes the registration. In the
construction of the jcard claim, the \"jcard\" [MUST]{.bcp14} include at
least one of the URL, EMAIL, TEL, or ADR properties. UACs supporting
this specification [MUST]{.bcp14} be prepared to receive a full jCard.
Call originators (at the UAC) can use the information returned by the
jCard to contact the intermediary that rejected the call to appeal the
intermediary\'s blocking of the call attempt. What the intermediary does
if the blocked caller contacts the intermediary is outside the scope of
this document.[¶](#section-3.2.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#s.JWS}
::: {#section-3.2.3 .section}
#### [3.2.3.](#section-3.2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [JWS Signature](#name-jws-signature){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-jws-signature}

[JWS](#RFC7515){.xref} \[[RFC7515](#RFC7515){.xref}\] specifies the
procedure for calculating the signature over the jCard JWT. [Section
4](#EXAMPLES){.xref} of this document has a detailed example on
constructing the JWS, including the
signature.[¶](#section-3.2.3-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-3.3 .section}
### [3.3.](#section-3.3){.section-number .selfRef} [UAC Operation](#name-uac-operation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-uac-operation}

A UAC conforming to this specification [MUST]{.bcp14} include the
sip.608 feature-capability indicator in the Feature-Caps header field of
the INVITE request.[¶](#section-3.3-1){.pilcrow}

Upon receiving a 608 response, UACs perform normal SIP processing for
6xx responses.[¶](#section-3.3-2){.pilcrow}

As for the disposition of the jCard itself, the UAC [MUST]{.bcp14} check
the \"iat\" claim in the JWT. As noted in [Section 3.2.2](#JWT){.xref},
we are concerned about replay attacks. Therefore, the UAC [MUST]{.bcp14}
reject jCards that come with an expired \"iat\". The definition of
\"expired\" is a matter of local policy. A reasonable value would be on
the order of a minute due to clock drift and the possibility of the
playing of an audio announcement before the delivery of the 608
response.[¶](#section-3.3-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3.4 .section}
### [3.4.](#section-3.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Legacy Interoperation](#name-legacy-interoperation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-legacy-interoperation}

If the UAC indicates support for 608 and the intermediary issues a 608,
life is good, as the UAC will receive all the information it needs to
remediate an erroneous block by an intermediary. However, what if the
UAC does not understand 608? For example, how can we support callers
from a legacy, non-SIP, public-switched network connecting to the SIP
network via a media gateway?[¶](#section-3.4-1){.pilcrow}

We address this situation by having the first network element that
conforms with this specification play an announcement. See [Section
3.5](#announcement){.xref} for requirements on the announcement. The
simple rule is a network element that inserts the sip.608 feature
capability [MUST]{.bcp14} be able to convey at a minimum how to contact
the operator of the intermediary that rejected the call
attempt.[¶](#section-3.4-2){.pilcrow}

The degenerate case is the intermediary is the only element that
understands the semantics of the 608 response code. Obviously, any SIP
device will understand that a 608 response code is a 6xx error. However,
there are no other elements in the call path that understand the meaning
of the value of the Call-Info header field. The intermediary knows this
is the case as the INVITE request will not have the sip.608 feature
capability. In this case, one can consider the intermediary to be the
element \"inserting\" a virtual sip.608 feature capability. If the
caveats described in Sections [3.5](#announcement){.xref} and
[6](#Security){.xref} do not hold, the intermediary [MUST]{.bcp14} play
the announcement.[¶](#section-3.4-3){.pilcrow}

Now we take the case where a network element that understands the 608
response code receives an INVITE for further processing. A network
element conforming with this specification [MUST]{.bcp14} insert the
sip.608 feature capability per the behaviors described in [Section
4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6809#section-4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC6809](#RFC6809){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.4-4){.pilcrow}

Do note that even if a network element plays an announcement describing
the contents of the 608 response message, the network element
[MUST]{.bcp14} forward the 608 response code message as the final
response to the INVITE.[¶](#section-3.4-5){.pilcrow}

One aspect of using a feature capability is that only the network
elements that will either consume (UAC) or play an announcement (media
gateway, session border controller (SBC) \[[RFC7092](#RFC7092){.xref}\],
or proxy) need to understand the sip.608 feature capability. If the
other network elements conform to [Section
16.6](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3261#section-16.6){.relref} of
\[[RFC3261](#RFC3261){.xref}\], they will pass header fields such as
\"Feature-Caps: \*;+sip.608\" unmodified and without need for
upgrade.[¶](#section-3.4-6){.pilcrow}

Because the ultimate disposition of the call attempt will be a 600-class
response, the network element conveying the announcement in the legacy
direction [MUST]{.bcp14} use the 183 Session Progress response to
establish the media session. Because of the small chance the UAC is an
extremely old legacy device and is using UDP, the UAC [MUST]{.bcp14}
include support for [100rel](#RFC3262){.xref}
\[[RFC3262](#RFC3262){.xref}\] in its INVITE, the network element
conveying the announcement [MUST]{.bcp14} Require 100rel in the 183, and
the UAC [MUST]{.bcp14} issue a Provisional Response ACKnowledgement
(PRACK) to which the network element [MUST]{.bcp14} respond 200 OK
PRACK.[¶](#section-3.4-7){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#announcement}
::: {#section-3.5 .section}
### [3.5.](#section-3.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Announcement Requirements](#name-announcement-requirements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-announcement-requirements}

There are a few requirements on the element that handles the
announcement for legacy interoperation.[¶](#section-3.5-1){.pilcrow}

As noted above, the element that inserts the sip.608 feature capability
is responsible for conveying the information referenced by the Call-Info
header field in the 608 response message. However, this specification
does not mandate how to convey that
information.[¶](#section-3.5-2){.pilcrow}

Let us take the case where a telecommunications service provider
controls the element inserting the sip.608 feature capability. It would
be reasonable to expect the service provider would play an announcement
in the media path towards the UAC (caller). It is important to note the
network element should be mindful of the media type requested by the UAC
as it formulates the announcement. For example, it would make sense for
an INVITE that only indicated audio codecs in the [Session Description
Protocol (SDP)](#RFC4566){.xref} \[[RFC4566](#RFC4566){.xref}\] to
result in an audio announcement. Likewise, if the INVITE only indicated
[real-time text](#RFC4103){.xref} \[[RFC4103](#RFC4103){.xref}\] and the
network element can render the information in the requested media
format, the network element should send the information in a text
format.[¶](#section-3.5-3){.pilcrow}

It is also possible for the network element inserting the sip.608
feature capability to be under the control of the same entity that
controls the UAC. For example, a large call center might have legacy
UACs, but have a modern outbound calling proxy that understands the full
semantics of the 608 response code. In this case, it is enough for the
outbound calling proxy to digest the Call-Info information and handle
the information digitally rather than \"transcoding\" the Call-Info
information for presentation to the caller.[¶](#section-3.5-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#EXAMPLES}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Examples](#name-examples){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-examples}

These examples are not normative, do not include all protocol elements,
and may have errors. Review the protocol documents for actual syntax and
semantics of the protocol elements.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Full Exchange](#name-full-exchange){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-full-exchange}

Given an INVITE, shamelessly taken from \[[SHAKEN](#SHAKEN){.xref}\],
with the line breaks in the Identity header field for display purposes
only:[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-2}
``` sourcecode
INVITE sip:+12155550113@tel.one.example.net SIP/2.0
Max-Forwards: 69
Contact: <sip:+12155550112@[2001:db8::12]:50207;rinstance=9da3088f3>
To: <sip:+12155550113@tel.one.example.net>
From: "Alice" <sip:+12155550112@tel.two.example.net>;tag=614bdb40
Call-ID: 79048YzkxNDA5NTI1MzA0OWFjOTFkMmFlODhiNTI2OWQ1ZTI
P-Asserted-Identity: "Alice"<sip:+12155550112@tel.two.example.net>,
    <tel:+12155550112>
CSeq: 2 INVITE
Allow: SUBSCRIBE, NOTIFY, INVITE, ACK, CANCEL, BYE, REFER, INFO,
    MESSAGE, OPTIONS
Content-Type: application/sdp
Date: Tue, 16 Aug 2016 19:23:38 GMT
Feature-Caps: *;+sip.608
Identity: eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6InBhc3Nwb3J0IiwicHB0Ijoic2hha2V
uIiwieDV1IjoiaHR0cDovL2NlcnQuZXhhbXBsZTIubmV0L2V4YW1wbGUuY2VydCJ9.eyJ
hdHRlc3QiOiJBIiwiZGVzdCI6eyJ0biI6IisxMjE1NTU1MDExMyJ9LCJpYXQiOiIxNDcx
Mzc1NDE4Iiwib3JpZyI6eyJ0biI6IisxMjE1NTU1MDExMiJ9LCJvcmlnaWQiOiIxMjNlN
DU2Ny1lODliLTEyZDMtYTQ1Ni00MjY2NTU0NDAwMCJ9.QAht_eFqQlaoVrnEV56Qly-OU
tsDGifyCcpYjWcaR661Cz1hutFH2BzIlDswTahO7ujjqsWjeoOb4h97whTQJg;info=
<http://cert.example2.net/example.cert>;alg=ES256
Content-Length: 153

v=0
o=- 13103070023943130 1 IN IP6 2001:db8::177
c=IN IP6 2001:db8::177
t=0 0
m=audio 54242 RTP/AVP 0
a=sendrecv
```

[¶](#section-4.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::

An intermediary could reply:[¶](#section-4.1-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-4}
``` sourcecode
SIP/2.0 608 Rejected
Via: SIP/2.0/UDP [2001:db8::177]:60012;branch=z9hG4bK-524287-1
From: "Alice" <sip:+12155550112@tel.two.example.net>;tag=614bdb40
To: <sip:+12155550113@tel.one.example.net>
Call-ID: 79048YzkxNDA5NTI1MzA0OWFjOTFkMmFlODhiNTI2OWQ1ZTI
CSeq: 2 INVITE
Call-Info: <https://block.example.net/complaint-jws>;purpose=jwscard
```

[¶](#section-4.1-4){.pilcrow}
:::

The location https://block.example.net/complaint-jws resolves to a JWS.
One would construct the JWS as follows.[¶](#section-4.1-5){.pilcrow}

The JWS header of this example jCard could
be:[¶](#section-4.1-6){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-7}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-json}
{ "alg":"ES256",
  "typ":"vcard+json",
  "x5u":"https://certs.example.net/reject_key.cer"
}
```

[¶](#section-4.1-7){.pilcrow}
:::

Now, let us construct a minimal jCard. For this example, the jCard
refers the caller to an email address,
remediation\@blocker.example.net:[¶](#section-4.1-8){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-9}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-json}
["vcard",
  [
    ["version", {}, "text", "4.0"],
    ["fn", {}, "text", "Robocall Adjudication"],
    ["email", {"type":"work"}, "text", 
     "remediation@blocker.example.net"]
  ]
]
```

[¶](#section-4.1-9){.pilcrow}
:::

With this jCard, we can now construct the
JWT:[¶](#section-4.1-10){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-11}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-json}
{
  "iat":1546008698,
  "jcard":["vcard",
    [
      ["version", {}, "text", "4.0"],
      ["fn", {}, "text", "Robocall Adjudication"],
      ["email", {"type":"work"},
       "text", "remediation@blocker.example.net"]
    ]
  ]
} 
```

[¶](#section-4.1-11){.pilcrow}
:::

To calculate the signature, we need to encode the JSON Object Signing
and Encryption (JOSE) header and JWT into base64url. As an
implementation note, one can trim whitespace in the JSON objects to save
a few bytes. UACs [MUST]{.bcp14} be prepared to receive pretty-printed,
compact, or bizarrely formatted JSON. For the purposes of this example,
we leave the objects with pretty whitespace. Speaking of pretty vs.
machine formatting, these examples have line breaks in the base64url
encodings for ease of publication in the RFC format. The specification
of base64url allows for these line breaks, and the decoded text works
just fine. However, those extra line-break octets would affect the
calculation of the signature. Implementations [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} insert
line breaks into the base64url encodings of the JOSE header or JWT. This
also means UACs [MUST]{.bcp14} be prepared to receive arbitrarily long
octet streams from the URI referenced by the Call-Info header
field.[¶](#section-4.1-12){.pilcrow}

base64url of JOSE header:[¶](#section-4.1-13){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-14 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft .art-hex-dump}
    eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6InZjYXJkK2pzb24iLCJ4NXUiOiJodHRwczov
    L2NlcnRzLmV4YW1wbGUubmV0L3JlamVjdF9rZXkuY2VyIn0=

[¶](#section-4.1-14){.pilcrow}
:::

base64url of JWT:[¶](#section-4.1-15){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-16 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft .art-hex-dump}
    eyJpYXQiOjE1NDYwMDg2OTgsImpjYXJkIjpbInZjYXJkIixbWyJ2ZXJzaW9uIix7
    fSwidGV4dCIsIjQuMCJdLFsiZm4iLHt9LCJ0ZXh0IiwiUm9ib2NhbGwgQWRqdWRp
    Y2F0aW9uIl0sWyJlbWFpbCIseyJ0eXBlIjoid29yayJ9LCJ0ZXh0IiwicmVtZWRp
    YXRpb25AYmxvY2tlci5leGFtcGxlLm5ldCJdXV19

[¶](#section-4.1-16){.pilcrow}
:::

In this case, the object to sign (remembering this is just a single long
line; the line breaks are for ease of review but do not appear in the
actual object) is as follows:[¶](#section-4.1-17){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-18 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft .art-hex-dump}
    eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6InZjYXJk
    K2pzb24iLCJ4NXUiOiJodHRwczovL2NlcnRzLmV4YW1wbGUubmV0L3JlamVjdF9r
    ZXkuY2VyIn0.eyJpYXQiOjE1NDYwMDg2OTgsImpjYXJkIjpbInZjYXJkIixbWyJ2
    ZXJzaW9uIix7fSwidGV4dCIsIjQuMCJdLFsiZm4iLHt9LCJ0ZXh0IiwiUm9ib2Nh
    bGwgQWRqdWRpY2F0aW9uIl0sWyJlbWFpbCIseyJ0eXBlIjoid29yayJ9LCJ0ZXh0
    IiwicmVtZWRpYXRpb25AYmxvY2tlci5leGFtcGxlLm5ldCJdXV19

[¶](#section-4.1-18){.pilcrow}
:::

We use the following X.509 PKCS #8-encoded Elliptic Curve Digital
Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) key, also shamelessly taken from
\[[SHAKEN](#SHAKEN){.xref}\], as an example key for signing the hash of
the above text. Do NOT use this key in real life! It is for example
purposes only. At the very least, we would strongly recommend encrypting
the key at rest.[¶](#section-4.1-19){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-20 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
    -----BEGIN PRIVATE KEY-----
    MIGHAgEAMBMGByqGSM49AgEGCCqGSM49AwEHBG0wawIBAQQgi7q2TZvN9VDFg8Vy
    qCP06bETrR2v8MRvr89rn4i+UAahRANCAAQWfaj1HUETpoNCrOtp9KA8o0V79IuW
    ARKt9C1cFPkyd3FBP4SeiNZxQhDrD0tdBHls3/wFe8++K2FrPyQF9vuh
    -----END PRIVATE KEY-----

    -----BEGIN PUBLIC KEY-----
    MFkwEwYHKoZIzj0CAQYIKoZIzj0DAQcDQgAE8HNbQd/TmvCKwPKHkMF9fScavGeH
    78YTU8qLS8I5HLHSSmlATLcslQMhNC/OhlWBYC626nIlo7XeebYS7Sb37g==
    -----END PUBLIC KEY-----

[¶](#section-4.1-20){.pilcrow}
:::

The resulting JWS, using the above key on the above object, renders the
following ECDSA P-256 SHA-256 digital
signature.[¶](#section-4.1-21){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-22 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
    7uz2SADRvPFOQOO_UgF2ZTUjPlDTegtPrYB04UHBMwBD6g9AmL
    5harLJdTKDSTtH-LOV1jwJaGRUOUJiwP27ag

[¶](#section-4.1-22){.pilcrow}
:::

Thus, the JWS stored at https://blocker.example.net/complaints-jws would
contain:[¶](#section-4.1-23){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1-24 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
    eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6InZjYXJkK2pzb24iLCJ4NXUiOiJodHRwczovL
    2NlcnRzLmV4YW1wbGUubmV0L3JlamVjdF9rZXkuY2VyIn0.eyJpYXQiOjE1NDYwMD
    g2OTgsImpjYXJkIjpbInZjYXJkIixbWyJ2ZXJzaW9uIix7fSwidGV4dCIsIjQuMCJ
    dLFsiZm4iLHt9LCJ0ZXh0IiwiUm9ib2NhbGwgQWRqdWRpY2F0aW9uIl0sWyJlbWFp
    bCIseyJ0eXBlIjoid29yayJ9LCJ0ZXh0IiwicmVtZWRpYXRpb25AYmxvY2tlci5le
    GFtcGxlLm5ldCJdXV19.7uz2SADRvPFOQOO_UgF2ZTUjPlDTegtPrYB04UHBMwBD6
    g9AmL5harLJdTKDSTtH-LOV1jwJaGRUOUJiwP27ag

[¶](#section-4.1-24){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-4.2 .section}
### [4.2.](#section-4.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Web Site jCard](#name-web-site-jcard){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-web-site-jcard}

For an intermediary that provides a Web site for adjudication, the jCard
could contain the following. Note that we do not show the calculation of
the JWS; the URI reference in the Call-Info header field would be to the
JWS of the signed jCard.[¶](#section-4.2-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.2-2}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-json}
["vcard",
  [
    ["version", {}, "text", "4.0"],
    ["fn", {}, "text", "Robocall Adjudication"],
    ["url", {"type":"work"},
     "text", "https://blocker.example.net/adjudication-form"]
  ]
] 
```

[¶](#section-4.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-4.3 .section}
### [4.3.](#section-4.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Multi-modal jCard](#name-multi-modal-jcard){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-multi-modal-jcard}

For an intermediary that provides a telephone number and a postal
address, the jCard could contain the following. Note that we do not show
the calculation of the JWS; the URI reference in the Call-Info header
field would be to the JWS of the signed
jCard.[¶](#section-4.3-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.3-2}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-json}
["vcard",
  [
    ["version", {}, "text", "4.0"],
    ["fn", {}, "text", "Robocall Adjudication"],
    ["adr", {"type":"work"}, "text",
      ["Argument Clinic",
       "12 Main St","Anytown","AP","000000","Somecountry"]
    ]
    ["tel", {"type":"work"}, "uri", "tel:+1-555-555-0112"]
  ]
]
```

[¶](#section-4.3-2){.pilcrow}
:::

Note that it is up to the UAC to decide which jCard contact modality, if
any, it will use.[¶](#section-4.3-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.4 .section}
### [4.4.](#section-4.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Legacy Interoperability](#name-legacy-interoperability){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-legacy-interoperability}

[Figure 5](#legacy_ladder){.xref} depicts a call flow illustrating
legacy interoperability. In this non-normative example, we see a UAC
that does not support the full semantics for 608. However, there is an
SBC that does support 608. Per \[[RFC6809](#RFC6809){.xref}\], the SBC
can insert \"\*;+sip.608\" into the Feature-Caps header field for the
INVITE. When the intermediary, labeled \"Called Party Proxy\" in the
figure, rejects the call, it knows it can simply perform the processing
described in this document. Since the intermediary saw the sip.608
feature capability, it knows it does not need to send any media
describing whom to contact in the event of an erroneous rejection. For
illustrative purposes, the figure shows generic SIP Proxies in the flow.
Their presence or absence or the number of proxies is not relevant to
the operation of the protocol. They are in the figure to show that
proxies that do not understand the sip.608 feature capability can still
participate in a network offering 608
services.[¶](#section-4.4-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-legacy-operation}

::: {#legacy_ladder}
::: {#section-4.4-2.1 .artwork .art-text .alignCenter .art-ascii-art}
                                                          +---------+
                                                          |  Call   |
                                                          |Analytics|
                                                          | Engine  |
                                                          +--+--+---+
                                                             ^  |
                                                             |  |
                                                             |  v
                                                           +-+--+-+
        +---+    +-----+    +---+    +-----+    +-----+    |Called|
        |UAC+----+Proxy+----+SBC+----+Proxy+----+Proxy+----+Party |
        +---+    +-----+    +---+    +-----+    +-----+    |Proxy |
          |                   |                            +------+
          | INVITE            |                               |
          |------------------>|                               |
          |                   | INVITE                        |
          |                   |------------------------------>|
          |                   | Feature-Caps: *;+sip.608      |
          |                   |                               |
          |                   |                  608 Rejected |
          |                   |<------------------------------|
          |               183 |              Call-Info: <...> |
          |<------------------|    [path for Call-Info elided |
          |     SDP for media |     for illustration purposes]|
          |                   |                               |
          | PRACK             |                               |
          |------------------>|                               |
          |                   |                               |
          |      200 OK PRACK |                               |
          |<------------------|                               |
          |                   |                               |
          |<== Announcement ==|                               |
          |                   |                               |
          |      608 Rejected |                               |
          |<------------------|                               |
          |  Call-Info: <...> |                               |
          |                   |                               |
:::

[Figure 5](#figure-5){.selfRef}: [Legacy
Operation](#name-legacy-operation){.selfRef}
:::

When the SBC receives the 608 response code, it correlates that with the
original INVITE from the UAC. The SBC remembers that it inserted the
sip.608 feature capability, which means it is responsible for somehow
alerting the UAC the call failed and disclosing whom to contact. At this
point, the SBC can play a prompt, either natively or through a mechanism
such as [NETANN](#RFC4240){.xref} \[[RFC4240](#RFC4240){.xref}\], that
sends the relevant information in the appropriate media to the UAC.
Since this is a potentially long transaction and there is a chance the
UAC is using an unreliable transport protocol, the UAC will have
indicated support for provisional responses, the SBC will indicate it
requires a PRACK from the UAC in the 183 response, the UAC will provide
the PRACK, and the SBC will acknowledge receipt of the PRACK before
playing the announcement.[¶](#section-4.4-3){.pilcrow}

As an example, the SBC could extract the FN and TEL jCard fields and
play something like a special information tone (see Section 6.21.2.1 of
Telcordia \[[SR-2275](#SR-2275){.xref}\] or Section 7 of [ITU-T
E.180](#ITU.E.180.1998){.xref}
\[[ITU.E.180.1998](#ITU.E.180.1998){.xref}\]), followed by \"Your call
has been rejected by\...\", followed by a text-to-speech translation of
the FN text, followed by \"You can reach them on\...\", followed by a
text-to-speech translation of the telephone number in the TEL
field.[¶](#section-4.4-4){.pilcrow}

Note that the SBC also still sends the full 608 response code, including
the Call-Info header field, towards the
UAC.[¶](#section-4.4-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [SIP Response Code](#name-sip-response-code){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-sip-response-code}

This document defines a new SIP response code, 608, in the \"Response
Codes\" subregistry of the \"Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
Parameters\" registry defined in
\[[RFC3261](#RFC3261){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

Response code:
:   608[¶](#section-5.1-2.2){.pilcrow}

Description:
:   Rejected[¶](#section-5.1-2.4){.pilcrow}

Reference:
:   RFC 8688[¶](#section-5.1-2.6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [SIP Feature-Capability Indicator](#name-sip-feature-capability-indi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-sip-feature-capability-indi}

This document defines the feature capability, sip.608, in the \"SIP
Feature-Capability Indicator Registration Tree\" registry defined in
\[[RFC6809](#RFC6809){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}

Name:
:   sip.608[¶](#section-5.2-2.2){.pilcrow}

Description:
:   This feature-capability indicator, when included in a Feature-Caps
    header field of an INVITE request, indicates that the entity
    associated with the indicator will be responsible for indicating to
    the caller any information contained in the 608 SIP response code,
    specifically, the value referenced by the Call-Info header
    field.[¶](#section-5.2-2.4){.pilcrow}

Reference:
:   RFC 8688[¶](#section-5.2-2.6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#JWT-IANA}
::: {#section-5.3 .section}
### [5.3.](#section-5.3){.section-number .selfRef} [JSON Web Token Claim](#name-json-web-token-claim){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-json-web-token-claim}

This document defines the new JSON Web Token claim in the \"JSON Web
Token Claims\" subregistry created by \[[RFC7519](#RFC7519){.xref}\].
[Section 3.2.2](#JWT){.xref} defines the syntax. The required
information is:[¶](#section-5.3-1){.pilcrow}

Claim Name:
:   jcard[¶](#section-5.3-2.2){.pilcrow}

Claim Description:
:   jCard data[¶](#section-5.3-2.4){.pilcrow}

Change Controller:
:   IESG[¶](#section-5.3-2.6){.pilcrow}

Reference:
:   RFC 8688,
    \[[RFC7095](#RFC7095){.xref}\][¶](#section-5.3-2.8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-5.4 .section}
### [5.4.](#section-5.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Call-Info Purpose](#name-call-info-purpose){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-call-info-purpose}

This document defines the new predefined value \"jwscard\" for the
\"purpose\" header field parameter of the Call-Info header field. This
modifies the \"Header Field Parameters and Parameter Values\"
subregistry of the \"Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Parameters\"
registry by adding this RFC as a reference to the line for the header
field \"Call-Info\" and parameter name
\"purpose\":[¶](#section-5.4-1){.pilcrow}

Header Field:
:   Call-Info[¶](#section-5.4-2.2){.pilcrow}

Parameter Name:
:   purpose[¶](#section-5.4-2.4){.pilcrow}

Predefined Values:
:   Yes[¶](#section-5.4-2.6){.pilcrow}

Reference:
:   RFC 8688[¶](#section-5.4-2.8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

Intermediary operators need to be mindful to whom they are sending the
608 response. The intermediary could be rejecting a truly malicious
caller. This raises two issues. The first is the caller, now alerted
that an intermediary is automatically rejecting their call attempts, may
change their call behavior to defeat call-blocking systems. The second,
and more significant risk, is that by providing a contact in the
Call-Info header field, the intermediary may be giving the malicious
caller a vector for attack. In other words, the intermediary will be
publishing an address that a malicious actor may use to launch an attack
on the intermediary. Because of this, intermediary operators may wish to
configure their response to only include a Call-Info header field for
INVITE, or other signed initiating methods, that pass validation by
[STIR](#RFC8224){.xref}
\[[RFC8224](#RFC8224){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

Another risk is as follows. Consider an attacker that floods a proxy
that supports the sip.608 feature. However, the SDP in the INVITE
request refers to a victim device. Moreover, the attacker somehow knows
there is a 608-aware gateway connecting to the victim who is on a
segment that lacks the sip.608 feature capability. Because the mechanism
described here can result in sending an audio file to the target of the
SDP, an attacker could use the mechanism described by this document as
an amplification attack, given a SIP INVITE can be under 1 kilobyte and
an audio file can be hundreds of kilobytes. One remediation for this is
for devices that insert a sip.608 feature capability to only transmit
media to what is highly likely to be the actual source of the call
attempt. A method for this is to only play media in response to a
STIR-signed INVITE that passes validation. Beyond requiring a valid STIR
signature on the INVITE, the intermediary can also use remediation
procedures such as doing the connectivity checks specified by
[Interactive Connectivity Establishment](#RFC8445){.xref}
\[[RFC8445](#RFC8445){.xref}\]. If the target did not request the media,
the check will fail.[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

Yet another risk is a malicious intermediary that generates a malicious
608 response with a jCard referring to a malicious agent. For example,
the recipient of a 608 may receive a TEL URI in the vCard. When the
recipient calls that address, the malicious agent could ask for
personally identifying information. However, instead of using that
information to verify the recipient\'s identity, they are phishing the
information for nefarious ends. A similar scenario can unfold if the
malicious agent inserts a URI that points to a phishing or other site.
As such, we strongly recommend the recipient validates to whom they are
communicating with if asking to adjudicate an erroneously rejected call
attempt. Since we may also be concerned about intermediate nodes
modifying contact information, we can address both issues with a single
solution. The remediation is to require the intermediary to sign the
jCard. Signing the jCard provides integrity protection. In addition, one
can imagine mechanisms such as used by
\[[SHAKEN](#SHAKEN){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-3){.pilcrow}

Similarly, one can imagine an adverse agent that maliciously spoofs a
608 response with a victim\'s contact address to many active callers who
may then all send redress requests to the specified address (the basis
for a denial-of-service attack). The process would occur as follows: (1)
a malicious agent senses INVITE requests from a variety of UACs and (2)
spoofs 608 responses with an unsigned redress address before the
intended receivers can respond, causing (3) the UACs to all contact the
redress address at once. The jCard encoding allows the UAC to verify the
blocking intermediary\'s identity before contacting the redress address.
Specifically, because the sender signs the jCard, we can
cryptographically trace the sender of the jCard. Given the protocol
machinery of having a signature, one can apply local policy to decide
whether to believe that the sender of the jCard represents the owner of
the contact information found in the jCard. This guards against a
malicious agent spoofing 608 responses.[¶](#section-6-4){.pilcrow}

Specifically, one could use policies around signing certificate issuance
as a mechanism for traceback to the entity issuing the jCard. One check
could be verifying that the identity of the subject of the certificate
relates to the To header field of the initial SIP request, similar to
validating that the intermediary was vouching for the From header field
of a SIP request with that identity. Note that we are only protecting
against a malicious intermediary and not a hidden intermediary attack
(formerly known as a \"man-in-the-middle attack\"). Thus, we only need
to ensure the signature is fresh, which is why we include \"iat\". For
most implementations, we assume that the intermediary has a single set
of contact points and will generate the jCard on demand. As such, there
is no need to directly correlate HTTPS fetches to specific calls.
However, since the intermediary is in control of the jCard and Call-Info
response, an intermediary may choose to encode per-call information in
the URI returned in a given 608 response. However, if the intermediary
does go that route, the intermediary [MUST]{.bcp14} use a
non-deterministic URI reference mechanism and be prepared to return
dummy responses to URI requests referencing calls that do not exist so
that attackers attempting to glean call metadata by guessing URIs (and
thus calls) will not get any actionable information from the HTTPS
GET.[¶](#section-6-5){.pilcrow}

Since the decision of whether to include Call-Info in the 608 response
is a matter of policy, one thing to consider is whether a legitimate
caller can ascertain whom to contact without including such information
in the 608. For example, in some jurisdictions, if only the terminating
service provider can be the intermediary, the caller can look up who the
terminating service provider is based on the routing information for the
dialed number. Thus, the Call-Info jCard could be redundant information.
However, the factors going into a particular service provider\'s or
jurisdiction\'s choice of whether to include Call-Info is outside the
scope of this document.[¶](#section-6-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.

\[RFC3261\]
:   [Rosenberg, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Schulzrinne, H.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Camarillo, G.]{.refAuthor}[, Johnston, A.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Peterson, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Sparks, R.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Handley, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and E. Schooler]{.refAuthor}, [\"SIP:
    Session Initiation Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3261]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC3261]{.seriesInfo}, June 2002,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3261>\>.

\[RFC3262\]
:   [Rosenberg, J.]{.refAuthor}[ and H. Schulzrinne]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Reliability of Provisional Responses in Session Initiation
    Protocol (SIP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3262]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3262]{.seriesInfo}, June 2002,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3262>\>.

\[RFC3326\]
:   [Schulzrinne, H.]{.refAuthor}[, Oran, D.]{.refAuthor}[, and G.
    Camarillo]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Reason Header Field for the Session
    Initiation Protocol (SIP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3326]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC3326]{.seriesInfo}, December 2002,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3326>\>.

\[RFC6809\]
:   [Holmberg, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Sedlacek, I.]{.refAuthor}[, and H.
    Kaplan]{.refAuthor}, [\"Mechanism to Indicate Support of Features
    and Capabilities in the Session Initiation Protocol
    (SIP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6809]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6809]{.seriesInfo}, November 2012,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6809>\>.

\[RFC7095\]
:   [Kewisch, P.]{.refAuthor}, [\"jCard: The JSON Format for
    vCard\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7095]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7095]{.seriesInfo}, January 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7095>\>.

\[RFC7515\]
:   [Jones, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Bradley, J.]{.refAuthor}[, and N.
    Sakimura]{.refAuthor}, [\"JSON Web Signature (JWS)\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 7515]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7515]{.seriesInfo}, May
    2015, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7515>\>.

\[RFC7518\]
:   [Jones, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"JSON Web Algorithms (JWA)\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 7518]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7518]{.seriesInfo}, May
    2015, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7518>\>.

\[RFC7519\]
:   [Jones, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Bradley, J.]{.refAuthor}[, and N.
    Sakimura]{.refAuthor}, [\"JSON Web Token (JWT)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7519]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7519]{.seriesInfo}, May 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7519>\>.

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:::

::: {#section-7.2 .section}
### [7.2.](#section-7.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[BaseRate\]
:   [Bar-Hillel, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Base-Rate Fallacy in
    Probability Judgements\"]{.refTitle}, April 1977,
    \<<https://apps.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA045772>\>.

\[ITU.E.180.1998\]
:   [ITU-T]{.refAuthor}, [\"Technical characteristics of tones for the
    telephone service\"]{.refTitle}, [ITU-T Recommendation
    E.180/Q.35]{.seriesInfo}, March 1998.

\[RFC4103\]
:   [Hellstrom, G.]{.refAuthor}[ and P. Jones]{.refAuthor}, [\"RTP
    Payload for Text Conversation\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4103]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4103]{.seriesInfo}, June 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4103>\>.

\[RFC4240\]
:   [Burger, E., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Van Dyke, J.]{.refAuthor}[, and A.
    Spitzer]{.refAuthor}, [\"Basic Network Media Services with
    SIP\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4240]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4240]{.seriesInfo}, December 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4240>\>.

\[RFC4566\]
:   [Handley, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Jacobson, V.]{.refAuthor}[, and C.
    Perkins]{.refAuthor}, [\"SDP: Session Description
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4566]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4566]{.seriesInfo}, July 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4566>\>.

\[RFC5039\]
:   [Rosenberg, J.]{.refAuthor}[ and C. Jennings]{.refAuthor}, [\"The
    Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Spam\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5039]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5039]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2008, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5039>\>.

\[RFC6350\]
:   [Perreault, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"vCard Format
    Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6350]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6350]{.seriesInfo}, August 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6350>\>.

\[RFC7092\]
:   [Kaplan, H.]{.refAuthor}[ and V. Pascual]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Taxonomy
    of Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Back-to-Back User
    Agents\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7092]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7092]{.seriesInfo}, December 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7092>\>.

\[RFC7340\]
:   [Peterson, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Schulzrinne, H.]{.refAuthor}[, and H.
    Tschofenig]{.refAuthor}, [\"Secure Telephone Identity Problem
    Statement and Requirements\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7340]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC7340]{.seriesInfo}, September 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7340>\>.

\[RFC8197\]
:   [Schulzrinne, H.]{.refAuthor}, [\"A SIP Response Code for Unwanted
    Calls\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8197]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8197]{.seriesInfo}, July 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8197>\>.

\[RFC8224\]
:   [Peterson, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Jennings, C.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}[, and C. Wendt]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Authenticated Identity Management in the Session Initiation
    Protocol (SIP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8224]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8224]{.seriesInfo}, February 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8224>\>.

\[RFC8259\]
:   [Bray, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The JavaScript Object Notation
    (JSON) Data Interchange Format\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 90]{.seriesInfo},
    [RFC 8259]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8259]{.seriesInfo},
    December 2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259>\>.

\[RFC8445\]
:   [Keranen, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Holmberg, C.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Rosenberg]{.refAuthor}, [\"Interactive Connectivity Establishment
    (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
    Traversal\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8445]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8445]{.seriesInfo}, July 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8445>\>.

\[SHAKEN\]
:   [ATIS/SIP Forum IP-INNI Task Group]{.refAuthor}, [\"Signature-based
    Handling of Asserted information using toKENs
    (SHAKEN)\"]{.refTitle}, [ATIS 1000074]{.seriesInfo}, January 2017,
    \<<https://www.sipforum.org/download/sip-forum-twg-10-signature-based-handling-of-asserted-information-using-tokens-shaken-pdf/?wpdmdl=2813>\>.

\[SR-2275\]
:   [Telcordia]{.refAuthor}, [\"Telcordia Notes on the
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [Telcordia SR-2275]{.seriesInfo},
    October 2000.
:::
:::

::: {#Acknowledgements}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

This document liberally lifts from \[[RFC8197](#RFC8197){.xref}\] in its
text and structure. However, the mechanism and purpose of 608 is quite
different than 607. Any errors are the current editor\'s and not the
editor of RFC 8197. Thanks also go to Ken Carlberg of the FCC, Russ
Housley, Paul Kyzivat, and Tolga Asveren for their suggestions on
improving the document. Tolga\'s suggestion to provide a mechanism for
legacy interoperability served to expand the document by 50%. In
addition, Tolga came up with the jCard attack. Finally, Christer
Holmberg, as always, provided a close reading and fixed a SIP
feature-capability bug found by Yehoshua
Gev.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}

Of course, we appreciated the close read and five pages of comments from
our estimable Area Director, Adam Roach. In addition, we received
valuable comments during IETF Last Call and JWT review from Ines Robles,
Mike Jones, and Brian Campbell, and IESG review from Alissa Cooper, Eric
Vyncke, Alexey Melnikov, Benjamin Kaduk, Barry Leiba, and with most
glee, Warren Kumari.[¶](#section-appendix.a-2){.pilcrow}

Finally, Bhavik Nagda provided clarifying edits as well and, more
especially, wrote and tested an implementation of the 608 response code
in Kamailio. Code is available at
<https://github.com/nagdab/608_Implementation>. Grace Chuan from MIT
regenerated and verified the JWT while working at the
FCC.[¶](#section-appendix.a-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Eric W. Burger]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Georgetown University]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[37th & O St, NW]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Washington]{.locality}, [DC]{.region} [20057]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <eburger@standardstrack.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Bhavik Nagda]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Massachusetts Institute of Technology]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[77 Massachusetts Avenue]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cambridge]{.locality}, [MA]{.region} [02139]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <nagdab@gmail.com>
:::
:::
:::
