  RFC 8718   Venue Selection         February 2020
  ---------- ----------------------- ---------------
  Lear       Best Current Practice   \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8718](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8718){.eref}

BCP:
:   226

Category:
:   Best Current Practice

Published:
:   February 2020

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Author:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    E. Lear, [Ed.]{.editor}
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8718 {#rfcnum}

# IETF Plenary Meeting Venue Selection Process {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

The IETF Administration Support Activity (IASA) is responsible for
arranging the selection and operation of the IETF plenary meeting venue.
This memo specifies IETF community requirements for meeting venues,
including hotels and meeting space. It also directs the IASA to make
available additional process documents that describe the current meeting
selection process.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This memo documents an Internet Best Current
Practice.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on BCPs
is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8718>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Venue Selection
    Objectives](#name-venue-selection-objectives){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1}
        [2.1](#section-2.1){.xref}.  [Core
        Values](#name-core-values){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2}
        [2.2](#section-2.2){.xref}.  [Venue Selection
        Non-objectives](#name-venue-selection-non-objecti){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Meeting
    Criteria](#name-meeting-criteria){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [Mandatory
        Criteria](#name-mandatory-criteria){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [Important
        Criteria](#name-important-criteria){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3}
        [3.3](#section-3.3){.xref}.  [Other
        Considerations](#name-other-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Documentation
    Requirements](#name-documentation-requirements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Privacy
    Considerations](#name-privacy-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Normative
    References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Informative
    References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Contributors](#name-contributors){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [](#section-appendix.c){.xref}[Author\'s
    Address](#name-authors-address){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.12.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#Introduction}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

The IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)
\[[RFC8711](#RFC8711){.xref}\] is responsible for arranging the
selection and operation of the IETF plenary meeting venue. The purpose
of this document is to guide the IASA in their selection of regions,
cities, facilities, and hotels. The IASA should apply this guidance at
different points in the process in an attempt to faithfully meet the
requirements of the IETF community. We specify a set of general criteria
for venue selection and several requirements for transparency and
community consultation.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

It remains the responsibility of the IASA to apply their best judgment.
The IASA accepts input and feedback during the consultation process and
later (for instance, when there are changes in the situation at a chosen
location). The community is encouraged to provide direct feedback about
the IASA\'s performance to the IETF Administration LLC, the Nominations
Committee (NOMCOM), or the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).
Any reviews of IASA decisions remain subject to the provisions of
[Section
4.7](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8711#section-4.7){.relref} of
\[[RFC8711](#RFC8711){.xref}\] (BCP 101).[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

The following four terms describe the places for which the IETF
contracts services:[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Venue:
:   An umbrella term for the city, meeting resources, and guest room
    resources.[¶](#section-1-4.2){.pilcrow}

Facility:
:   The building that houses meeting rooms and associated resources. It
    may also house an IETF Hotel.[¶](#section-1-4.4){.pilcrow}

IETF Hotels:
:   One or more hotels, in close proximity to the Facility, where the
    IETF guest room block allocations are negotiated and where network
    services managed by the IASA (e.g., the \"IETF\" SSID) are in
    use.[¶](#section-1-4.6){.pilcrow}

Overflow Hotels:
:   One or more hotels, usually in close proximity to the Facility,
    where the IETF has negotiated a group room rate for the purposes of
    the meeting. Of particular note is that Overflow Hotels are not
    usually connected to the IETF network and do not use network
    services managed by the IASA.[¶](#section-1-4.8){.pilcrow}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#objectives}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Venue Selection Objectives](#name-venue-selection-objectives){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-venue-selection-objectives}

::: {#core}
::: {#section-2.1 .section}
### [2.1.](#section-2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Core Values](#name-core-values){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-core-values}

Some IETF values pervade the selection process. These are often
applicable to multiple requirements listed in this document. At a
minimum, they include the following:[¶](#section-2.1-1){.pilcrow}

Why we meet:
:   We meet to pursue the IETF\'s mission
    \[[RFC3935](#RFC3935){.xref}\]. This is partly done by advancing the
    development of Internet-Drafts and RFCs. We also seek to facilitate
    attendee participation in multiple topics and to enable
    cross-pollination of ideas and
    technologies.[¶](#section-2.1-2.2){.pilcrow}

Inclusiveness:

:   We would like to facilitate the on-site or remote participation of
    anyone who wants to be involved. Widespread participation
    contributes to the diversity of perspectives represented in the
    working sessions.[¶](#section-2.1-2.4.1){.pilcrow}

    Every country has limits on who it will permit within its borders.
    However, the IETF seeks to:[¶](#section-2.1-2.4.2){.pilcrow}

    1.  [Minimize situations in which onerous entry regulations inhibit,
        discourage, or prevent participants from attending meetings;
        failing that, meeting locations are to be distributed such that
        onerous entry regulations are not always experienced by the same
        attendees;
        and[¶](#section-2.1-2.4.3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2.1-2.4.3.1}
    2.  [Avoid meeting in countries with laws that effectively exclude
        people on the basis of race, ethnicity, religion, gender, sexual
        orientation, national origin, citizenship, or gender
        identity.[¶](#section-2.1-2.4.3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2.1-2.4.3.2}

Where we meet:
:   We meet in different global locations, in order to spread the
    difficulty and cost of travel among active participants, balancing
    travel time and expense across participants based in various
    regions. Our regional location policy is articulated in
    \[[RFC8719](#RFC8719){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2.1-2.6){.pilcrow}

Internet Access:
:   As an organization, we write specifications for the Internet, and we
    use it heavily. Meeting attendees need unfiltered access to the
    general Internet and their corporate networks. \"Unfiltered
    access\", in this case, means that all forms of communication are
    allowed. This includes, but is not limited to, access to corporate
    networks via encrypted VPNs from the meeting Facility and Hotels,
    including Overflow Hotels. We also need open network access
    available at high enough data rates, at the meeting Facility, to
    support our work, which includes support of remote participation.
    Beyond this, we are the first users of our own technology. Any
    filtering may cause a problem with that technology development. In
    some cases, local laws may require some filtering. We seek to avoid
    such locales without reducing the pool of cities to an unacceptable
    level by stating a number of criteria below, one mandatory and
    others important, to allow for the case where local laws may require
    filtering in some circumstances.[¶](#section-2.1-2.8){.pilcrow}

Focus:
:   We meet to have focused technical discussions. These are not limited
    to scheduled breakout sessions, although of course those are
    important. They also happen over meals or drinks, through a specific
    type of non-session that we call a \"Bar BOF\", or in side meetings.
    Environments that are noisy or distracting prevent or reduce the
    effectiveness of these sessions and are therefore less desirable as
    a meeting Facility
    \[[RFC6771](#RFC6771){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2.1-2.10){.pilcrow}

Economics:
:   Meeting attendees participate as individuals. While many are
    underwritten by employers or sponsors, many are self-funded. In
    order to reduce participation costs and travel effort, we therefore
    seek locations that provide convenient budget alternatives for food
    and lodging, and that minimize travel segments from major airports
    to the Venue. Within reason, one\'s budget should not be a barrier
    to accommodation.[¶](#section-2.1-2.12){.pilcrow}

Least Astonishment and Openness:
:   Regular participants should not be surprised by meeting Venue
    selections, particularly when it comes to locales. To avoid
    surprise, the venue selection process, as with all other IETF
    processes, should be as open as practicable. It should be possible
    for the community to engage in discussion early to express its views
    on prospective selections, so that the community and the IASA can
    exchange views as to appropriateness long before a venue contract is
    considered.[¶](#section-2.1-2.14){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#nonobjectives}
::: {#section-2.2 .section}
### [2.2.](#section-2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Venue Selection Non-objectives](#name-venue-selection-non-objecti){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-venue-selection-non-objecti}

IETF meeting Venues are not selected or declined with the explicit
purposes of:[¶](#section-2.2-1){.pilcrow}

Politics:
:   Endorsing or condemning particular countries, political paradigms,
    laws, regulations, or policies.[¶](#section-2.2-2.2){.pilcrow}

Maximal attendance:
:   While the IETF strives to be as inclusive as possible, both online
    and in person, maximal meeting attendance in and of itself is not a
    goal. It would defeat a key goal of meeting if active contributors
    with differing points of view did not have the opportunity to
    resolve their disagreements, no matter how full the
    rooms.[¶](#section-2.2-2.4){.pilcrow}

Tourism:
:   Variety in site-seeing experiences.[¶](#section-2.2-2.6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#criteria}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Meeting Criteria](#name-meeting-criteria){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-meeting-criteria}

This section contains the criteria for IETF meetings. It is broken down
into three subsections: [mandatory criteria](#mandatories){.xref}
([Section 3.1](#mandatories){.xref}), [important
criteria](#importants){.xref} ([Section 3.2](#importants){.xref}), and
[other considerations](#otherconsiderations){.xref} ([Section
3.3](#otherconsiderations){.xref}), each as explained
below.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#mandatories}
::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Mandatory Criteria](#name-mandatory-criteria){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-mandatory-criteria}

If criteria in this subsection cannot be met, a particular location is
unacceptable for selection, and the IASA [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} enter into a
contract. Should the IASA learn that a location can no longer meet a
mandatory requirement after having entered into a contract, it will
inform the community and address the matter on a case-by-case
basis.[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

-   [The Facility [MUST]{.bcp14} provide sufficient space in an
    appropriate layout to accommodate the number of participants,
    leadership, and support staff expected to attend that
    meeting.[¶](#section-3.1-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-2.1}
-   [The Facility and IETF Hotels [MUST]{.bcp14} provide wheelchair
    access to accommodate the number of people who are anticipated to
    require it.[¶](#section-3.1-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-2.2}
-   [It [MUST]{.bcp14} be possible to provision Internet Access to the
    Facility and IETF Hotels that allows those attending in person to
    utilize the Internet for all their IETF, business, and day-to-day
    needs; in addition, there must be sufficient bandwidth and access
    for remote attendees. Provisions include, but are not limited to,
    native and unmodified IPv4 and IPv6 connectivity, and global
    reachability; there may be no additional limitation that would
    materially impact their Internet use. To ensure availability, it
    [MUST]{.bcp14} be possible to provision redundant paths to the
    Internet.[¶](#section-3.1-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-2.3}
:::
:::

::: {#importants}
::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Important Criteria](#name-important-criteria){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-important-criteria}

The criteria in this subsection are not mandatory, but they are still
highly significant. It may be necessary to trade-off one or more of
these criteria against others. A Venue that meets more of these criteria
is, on the whole, preferable to another that meets fewer of these
criteria. Requirements classed as Important can also be balanced across
Venue selections for multiple meetings. When a particular requirement in
this section cannot be met but the Venue is selected anyway, the IASA
[MUST]{.bcp14} notify the community at the time of the venue
announcement. Furthermore, it may be appropriate for the IASA to assist
those who, as a result, have been inconvenienced in some
way.[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-3.2.1 .section}
#### [3.2.1.](#section-3.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Venue City Criteria](#name-venue-city-criteria){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-venue-city-criteria}

The following requirements relate to the Venue
city.[¶](#section-3.2.1-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Travel to the Venue is acceptable based on cost, time, and burden
    for participants traveling from multiple regions. It is anticipated
    that the burden borne will generally be shared over the course of
    multiple
    years.[¶](#section-3.2.1-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.1-2.1}
-   [The Venue is assessed as favorable for obtaining a host and
    sponsors. That is, the Meeting is in a location in which it is
    possible and probable to find a host and
    sponsors.[¶](#section-3.2.1-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.1-2.2}
-   [Travel barriers to entry, including visa requirements, are likely
    to be such that an overwhelming majority of participants who wish to
    do so can attend. The term \"travel barriers\" is to be read broadly
    by the IASA in the context of whether a successful meeting can be
    had.[¶](#section-3.2.1-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.1-2.3}
-   [Economic, safety, and health risks associated with this Venue are
    acceptable.[¶](#section-3.2.1-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.1-2.4}
-   [The selection of the venue comports with the practices described in
    \[[RFC8719](#RFC8719){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.2.1-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.1-2.5}
:::

::: {#section-3.2.2 .section}
#### [3.2.2.](#section-3.2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Basic Venue Criteria](#name-basic-venue-criteria){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-basic-venue-criteria}

The following requirements relate to the Venue and
Facilities.[¶](#section-3.2.2-1){.pilcrow}

The IETF operates internationally and adjusts to local requirements.
Facilities selected for IETF meetings [SHALL]{.bcp14} have provided
written assurance that they are in compliance with local health, safety,
and accessibility laws and regulations, and that they will remain in
compliance throughout our stay.[¶](#section-3.2.2-2){.pilcrow}

In addition:[¶](#section-3.2.2-3){.pilcrow}

-   [There are sufficient places (e.g., a mix of hallways, bars, meeting
    rooms, and restaurants) for people to hold ad hoc conversations and
    group discussions in the combination of spaces offered by the
    facilities, hotels, and bars/restaurants in the surrounding area,
    within walking distance (5-10
    minutes).[¶](#section-3.2.2-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.2-4.1}
-   [The cost of guest rooms, meeting space, meeting food and beverage
    is affordable, within the norms of business
    travel.[¶](#section-3.2.2-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.2-4.2}
-   [The Facility is accessible, or reasonable accommodations can be
    made to allow access, by people with
    disabilities.[¶](#section-3.2.2-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.2-4.3}
:::

::: {#section-3.2.3 .section}
#### [3.2.3.](#section-3.2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Technical Meeting Needs](#name-technical-meeting-needs){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-technical-meeting-needs}

The following criteria relate to technical meeting
needs.[¶](#section-3.2.3-1){.pilcrow}

-   [The Facility\'s support technologies and services \-- network,
    audio-video, etc. \-- are sufficient for the anticipated activities
    at the meeting, or the Facility is willing to add such
    infrastructure, or these support technologies and services might be
    provided by a third party, all at no \-- or at an acceptable \--
    cost to the
    IETF.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.3-2.1}
-   [The IETF Hotels directly provide, or else permit and facilitate,
    the delivery of a high performance, robust, unfiltered, and
    unmodified Internet service for the public areas and guest rooms;
    this service is to be included in the cost of the
    room.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.3-2.2}
:::

::: {#section-3.2.4 .section}
#### [3.2.4.](#section-3.2.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Hotel Needs](#name-hotel-needs){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-hotel-needs}

The following criteria relate to IETF
Hotels.[¶](#section-3.2.4-1){.pilcrow}

-   [The IETF Hotels are within close proximity to each other and the
    Facility.[¶](#section-3.2.4-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.4-2.1}
-   [The guest rooms at the IETF Hotels are sufficient in number to
    house one-third or more of projected meeting
    attendees.[¶](#section-3.2.4-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.4-2.2}
-   [Overflow Hotels can be placed under contract, within convenient
    travel time to and from the Facility and at a variety of guest room
    rates.[¶](#section-3.2.4-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.4-2.3}
-   [The Facility environs include budget hotels within convenient
    travel time, cost, and
    effort.[¶](#section-3.2.4-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.4-2.4}
-   [The IETF Hotels are accessible by people with disabilities. While
    we mandate wheelchair accessibility, other forms are important and
    should be provided for to the extent possible based on anticipated
    needs of the
    community.[¶](#section-3.2.4-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.4-2.5}
-   [At least one IETF Hotel or the Facility has a space for use as a
    lounge, conducive to planned and ad hoc meetings and chatting, as
    well as a space for working online. There are tables with seating,
    convenient for small meetings with laptops. These can be at an open
    bar or casual restaurant. Preferably the lounge area is centrally
    located, permitting easy access to
    participants.[¶](#section-3.2.4-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.4-2.6}
:::

::: {#section-3.2.5 .section}
#### [3.2.5.](#section-3.2.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Food and Beverage](#name-food-and-beverage){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-food-and-beverage}

The following criteria relate to food and
beverage.[¶](#section-3.2.5-1){.pilcrow}

-   [The Facility environs, which include both on-site as well as areas
    within a reasonable walking distance or conveniently accessible by a
    short taxi ride or by local public transportation, have convenient
    and inexpensive choices for meals that can accommodate a wide range
    of dietary
    requirements.[¶](#section-3.2.5-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.5-2.1}
-   [A range of attendees\' health-related and religion-related dietary
    requirements can be satisfied with robust and flexible on-site
    service or through access to an adequate grocery
    store.[¶](#section-3.2.5-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.5-2.2}
-   [The Facility environs include grocery shopping that will
    accommodate a wide range of dietary requirements, within a
    reasonable walking distance or conveniently accessible by a short
    taxi, bus, or subway ride from the Facility and IETF
    Hotels.[¶](#section-3.2.5-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.5-2.3}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#otherconsiderations}
::: {#section-3.3 .section}
### [3.3.](#section-3.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Other Considerations](#name-other-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-other-considerations}

The following considerations are desirable, but they are not as
important as the preceding requirements and thus should not be
traded-off for them.[¶](#section-3.3-1){.pilcrow}

-   [We have something of a preference for an IETF meeting to be under
    \"One Roof\"; that is, qualified meeting space and guest rooms are
    available in the same
    facility.[¶](#section-3.3-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.3-2.1}
-   [It is desirable for Overflow Hotels to provide reasonable,
    reliable, unfiltered Internet service for the public areas and guest
    rooms, and for this service be included in the cost of the
    room.[¶](#section-3.3-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.3-2.2}
-   [It is desirable to enter into a multi-event contract with the
    Facility and IETF Hotels or associated hotel chains in case such a
    contract will reduce administrative costs, reduce direct attendee
    costs, or both.[¶](#section-3.3-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.3-2.3}
-   [When we are considering a city for the first time, it is
    particularly desirable to have someone familiar with both the locale
    and the IETF participate in the site visit. Such a person can
    provide guidance regarding safety, location of local services, the
    best ways to get to and from the Venue, and local customs, as well
    as how our requirements are
    met.[¶](#section-3.3-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.3-2.4}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Documentation Requirements](#name-documentation-requirements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-documentation-requirements}

The IETF Community works best when it is well informed. This memo does
not specify processes nor who has responsibility for fulfilling our
requirements for meetings. Nevertheless, both of these aspects are
important. Therefore, the IASA [SHALL]{.bcp14} publicly document and
keep current both a list of roles and responsibilities relating to IETF
meetings, as well as the selection processes they use in order to
fulfill the requirements of the community.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

This note proposes no protocols and therefore introduces no new protocol
insecurities.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Privacy}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Privacy Considerations](#name-privacy-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-privacy-considerations}

Different places have different constraints on individual privacy. The
requirements in this memo are intended to provide for some limited
protections. As meetings are announced, the IASA [SHALL]{.bcp14} inform
the IETF of any limitations to privacy they have become aware of in
their investigations. For example, participants would be informed of any
regulatory authentication or logging
requirements.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.

\[RFC8719\]
:   [Krishnan, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"High-Level Guidance for the Meeting
    Policy of the IETF\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 226]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8719]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8719]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2020, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8719>\>.
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC3935\]
:   [Alvestrand, H.]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Mission Statement for the
    IETF\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 95]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 3935]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC3935]{.seriesInfo}, October 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3935>\>.

\[RFC6771\]
:   [Eggert, L.]{.refAuthor}[ and G. Camarillo]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Considerations for Having a Successful \"Bar BOF\" Side
    Meeting\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6771]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6771]{.seriesInfo}, October 2012,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6771>\>.

\[RFC8711\]
:   [Haberman, B.]{.refAuthor}[, Hall, J.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Livingood]{.refAuthor}, [\"Structure of the IETF Administrative
    Support Activity, Version 2.0\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 101]{.seriesInfo},
    [RFC 8711]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8711]{.seriesInfo},
    February 2020, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8711>\>.
:::

::: {#Acknowledgements}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

Contributions came from [Jari Arkko]{.contact-name}, [Scott
Bradner]{.contact-name}, [Alissa Cooper]{.contact-name}, [Dave
Crocker]{.contact-name}, [Jordi Palet Martinez]{.contact-name}, [Andrew
Sullivan]{.contact-name}, and other participants in the MTGVENUE Working
Group. Those listed in this section or as contributors may or may not
agree with the content of this memo.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Contributors}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Contributors](#name-contributors){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-contributors}

The following people provided substantial text contributions to this
memo. Specifically, Fred Baker originated this
work.[¶](#section-appendix.b-1){.pilcrow}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Fred Baker]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: email
Email: <fred.ietf@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ray Pelletier]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: email
Email: <Rpelletier13@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Laura Nugent]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Association Management Solutions]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <lnugent@amsl.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Lou Berger]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[LabN Consulting, L.L.C.]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <lberger@labn.net>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ole Jacobsen]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[The Internet Protocol Journal]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <olejacobsen@me.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jim Martin]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[INOC]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <jim@inoc.com>
:::
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.c .section}
## [Author\'s Address](#name-authors-address){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-address}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Eliot Lear ([editor]{.role})]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Richtistrasse 7]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[CH-8304]{.postal-code} [Wallisellen]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Switzerland]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+41 44 878 9200](tel:+41%2044%20878%209200){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <lear@cisco.com>
:::
:::
:::
