  RFC 8721   Outbound Rights Advice   February 2020
  ---------- ------------------------ ---------------
  Halpern    Informational            \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8721](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8721){.eref}

Obsoletes:
:   [5377](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5377){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   February 2020

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Author:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Halpern, [Ed.]{.editor}
    :::

    ::: org
    Ericsson
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8721 {#rfcnum}

# Advice to the Trustees of the IETF Trust on Rights to Be Granted in IETF Documents {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

Contributors grant intellectual property rights to the IETF. The IETF
Trust holds and manages those rights on behalf of the IETF. The Trustees
of the IETF Trust are responsible for that management. This management
includes granting the licenses to copy, implement, and otherwise use
IETF Contributions, among them Internet-Drafts and RFCs. The Trustees of
the IETF Trust accept direction from the IETF regarding the rights to be
granted. This document describes the desires of the IETF regarding
outbound rights to be granted in IETF Contributions. This document
obsoletes RFC 5377 solely for the purpose of removing references to the
IETF Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC), which was part of the
IETF Administrative Support Activity
(IASA).[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Not all documents approved
by the IESG are candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see
Section 2 of RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8721>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Purpose in Granting
    Rights](#name-purpose-in-granting-rights){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Powers and
    Authority](#name-powers-and-authority){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Recommended Grants of Right to
    Copy](#name-recommended-grants-of-right){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [Rights Granted for Reproduction of
        RFCs](#name-rights-granted-for-reproduc){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2}
        [4.2](#section-4.2){.xref}.  [Rights Granted for Quoting from
        IETF
        Contributions](#name-rights-granted-for-quoting-){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3}
        [4.3](#section-4.3){.xref}.  [Rights Granted for Implementing
        Based on IETF
        Contributions](#name-rights-granted-for-implemen){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.4}
        [4.4](#section-4.4){.xref}.  [Rights Granted for Use of Text
        from IETF
        Contributions](#name-rights-granted-for-use-of-t){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.4.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.5}
        [4.5](#section-4.5){.xref}.  [Additional Licenses for IETF
        Contributions](#name-additional-licenses-for-iet){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.5.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2}
        [7.2](#section-7.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Author\'s
    Address](#name-authors-address){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

Under the current operational and administrative structures, IETF
intellectual property rights are vested in the IETF Trust administered
by a board of trustees. This includes the right to make use of IETF
Contributions, as granted by Contributors under the rules laid out in
\[[RFC5378](#RFC5378){.xref}\]. The Trustees of the IETF Trust are
therefore responsible for defining the rights to copy granted by the
IETF to people who wish to make use of the material in these
documents.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

For consistency and clarity, this document uses the same terminology
laid out in \[[RFC5378](#RFC5378){.xref}\] and uses the same meanings as
defined in that document.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

The IETF Trust, by way of its Trustees, has indicated, as is consistent
with the IETF structure, that it will respect the wishes of the IETF in
regard to what these granted rights ought to be. It is therefore the
IETF\'s responsibility to articulate those wishes. This document
represents the wishes of the IETF regarding the rights granted to all
users in regard to IETF Contributions, until it is
superseded.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#Purpose}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Purpose in Granting Rights](#name-purpose-in-granting-rights){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-purpose-in-granting-rights}

In providing a description of the wishes of the IETF with regard to
rights granted in RFCs, it is helpful to keep in mind the purpose of
granting such rights.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

The mission of the IETF is to produce documents that make the Internet
work better (see \[[RFC3935](#RFC3935){.xref}\] for more details). These
documents, when completed, are published as
RFCs.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

An important subclass of RFCs is standards describing protocols; for
these, the primary value to the Internet is the ability of implementors
to build solutions (products, software, etc.) that interoperate using
these standards. Hence, the IETF has a strong interest in seeing
accurate, interoperable implementations of the material the IETF
publishes. The IETF Trust grants rights to copy to people to make use of
the text in the RFCs in order to encourage accurate and interoperable
implementations.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

As early implementations from Internet-Drafts make use of descriptions
in those Internet-Drafts, similar desires apply to
Internet-Drafts.[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

Similar considerations also apply to non-standard, non-protocol
documents such as BCP (Best Current Practice) and Informational
documents; in this document, we recommend a common approach to the issue
of right-to-use licenses for all IETF
documents.[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}

Previous documents regarding rights in IETF documents have included in
the RFC text specific text to be used to achieve the stated goals. This
has proved problematic. When problems are found with such text, even
when the problem is not a change in intent, it is necessary to revise
the RFC to fix the problem. At best, this delays fixing legal issues
that need prompt attention. As such, this document describes the IETF
desires to the Trustees of the IETF Trust, but does not provide the
specific legal wording to address the goals. The selection, and updating
as necessary, of legal wording is left to the Trustees of the IETF
Trust.[¶](#section-2-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Powers and Authority](#name-powers-and-authority){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-powers-and-authority}

As described in the introduction, and formally specified in
\[[RFC5378](#RFC5378){.xref}\], the legal authority for determining and
granting users rights to copy material in RFCs and other IETF
Contributions rests with the Trustees for the IETF Trust. This document
provides guidance to that body, based on the rough consensus of the
IETF. The Trustees of the IETF Trust have the authority and
responsibility to determine the exact text insertions (or other
mechanisms), if any, needed in Internet-Drafts, RFCs, and all IETF
Contributions to meet these goals. The IETF Trust License Policy is
available from \[[TRUST-LEGAL](#TRUST-LEGAL){.xref}\]
\<<https://trustee.ietf.org/docs/IETF-Trust-License-Policy.pdf>\>.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

To ensure continuity, the starting point for license text and other
materials will be that previously created by the Trustees of the IETF
under the authority of \[[RFC5377](#RFC5377){.xref}\] which this
document supersedes. Changes to the IETF documentation, and document
policies themselves, take effect as determined by the Trustees of the
IETF Trust.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

This document does not specify what rights the IETF Trust receives from
others in IETF Contributions. That is left to another document
(\[[RFC5378](#RFC5378){.xref}\]). While care has been taken by the
working group in developing this document, and care will be taken by the
Trustees of the IETF Trust, to see that sufficient rights are granted to
the IETF Trust in IETF Contributions, it is also the case that the Trust
can not grant rights it has not or does not receive, and it is expected
that policies will be in line with that fact. Similarly, the rights
granted for pre-existing documents can not be expanded unless the
holders of rights in those Contributions choose to grant expanded
rights. Nonetheless, to the degree it can, and without embarking on a
massive effort, it is desirable if similar rights to those described
below can be granted in older RFCs.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Recommended Grants of Right to Copy](#name-recommended-grants-of-right){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-recommended-grants-of-right}

The IETF grants rights to copy and modify parts of IETF Contributions in
order to meet the objectives described earlier. As such, different
circumstances and different parts of documents may need different
grants. This section contains subsections for each such different grant
that is currently envisioned. Each section is intended to describe a
particular usage, to describe how that usage is recognizable, and to
provide guidance to the Trustees of the IETF Trust as to what rights the
IETF would like to see granted in that circumstance and what limitations
should be put on such granting.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

These recommendations for outgoing rights are structured around the
assumptions documented in \[[RFC5378](#RFC5378){.xref}\]. Thus, this
document is about granting rights derived from those granted to the IETF
Trust. The recommendations below are how those granted rights should in
turn be passed on to others using IETF documents in ways and for
purposes that fit with the goals of the IETF. This discussion is also
separate from discussion of the rights the IETF itself requires in
documents to do its job, as those are not \"outbound\" rights. It is
expected that the rights granted to the IETF will be a superset of those
copying rights we wish to grant to others.[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Rights Granted for Reproduction of RFCs](#name-rights-granted-for-reproduc){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-rights-granted-for-reproduc}

It has long been IETF policy to encourage copying of RFCs in full. This
permits wide dissemination of the material, without risking loss of
context or meaning. The IETF wishes to continue to permit anyone to make
full copies and translations of RFCs.[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.2 .section}
### [4.2.](#section-4.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Rights Granted for Quoting from IETF Contributions](#name-rights-granted-for-quoting-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-rights-granted-for-quoting-}

There is rough consensus that it is useful to permit quoting without
modification of excerpts from IETF Contributions. Such excerpts may be
of any length and in any context. Translation of quotations is also to
be permitted. All such quotations should be attributed properly to the
IETF and the IETF Contribution from which they are
taken.[¶](#section-4.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.3 .section}
### [4.3.](#section-4.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Rights Granted for Implementing Based on IETF Contributions](#name-rights-granted-for-implemen){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-rights-granted-for-implemen}

IETF Contributions often include components intended to be directly
processed by a computer. Examples of these include ABNF definitions, XML
Schemas, XML DTDs, XML RelaxNG definitions, tables of values, MIBs,
ASN.1, and classical programming code. These are included in IETF
Contributions for clarity and precision in specification. It is clearly
beneficial, when such items are included in IETF Contributions, to
permit the inclusion of such code components in products that implement
the Contribution. It has been pointed out that in several important
contexts, use of such code requires the ability to modify the code. One
common example of this is simply the need to adapt code for use in
specific contexts (languages, compilers, tool systems, etc.) Such use
frequently requires some changes to the text of the code from the IETF
Contribution. Another example is that code included in open source
products is frequently licensed to permit any and all of the code to be
modified. Since we want this code included in such products, it follows
that we need to permit such modification. While there has been
discussion of restricting in some way the rights to make such
modifications, the rough consensus of the IETF is that such restrictions
are likely a bad idea, and are certainly very complex to
define.[¶](#section-4.3-1){.pilcrow}

As such, the rough consensus is that the IETF Trust is to grant rights
such that code components of IETF Contributions can be extracted,
modified, and used by anyone in any way desired. To enable the broadest
possible extraction, modification, and usage, the IETF Trust should
avoid adding software license obligations beyond those already present
in a Contribution. The granted rights to extract, modify, and use code
should allow creation of derived works outside the IETF that may carry
additional license obligations. As the IETF Trust can not grant rights
it does not receive, the rights to extract, modify, and use code
described in this paragraph can not be granted in IETF Contributions
that are explicitly marked as not permitting derivative
works.[¶](#section-4.3-2){.pilcrow}

While it is up to the Trustees of the IETF Trust to determine the best
way of meeting this objective, two mechanisms are suggested here that
are believed to be helpful in documenting the intended grant to readers
and users of IETF Contributions.[¶](#section-4.3-3){.pilcrow}

Firstly, the Trustees of the IETF Trust should maintain, in a suitable,
easily accessible fashion, a list of common RFC components that will be
considered to be code. To start, this list should include at least the
items listed above. The Trustees of the IETF Trust will add to this list
as they deem suitable or as they are directed by the
IETF.[¶](#section-4.3-4){.pilcrow}

Additionally, the Trustees of the IETF Trust should define a textual
representation to be included in an IETF Contribution to indicate that a
portion of the document is considered by the authors (and later, the
working group, and upon approval, the IETF) to be code and thus subject
to the permissions granted to use code.[¶](#section-4.3-5){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.4 .section}
### [4.4.](#section-4.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Rights Granted for Use of Text from IETF Contributions](#name-rights-granted-for-use-of-t){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-rights-granted-for-use-of-t}

There is no consensus at this time to permit the use of text from RFCs
in contexts where the right to modify the text is required. The authors
of IETF Contributions may be able and willing to grant such rights
independently of the rights they have granted to the IETF by making the
Contribution.[¶](#section-4.4-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.5 .section}
### [4.5.](#section-4.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Additional Licenses for IETF Contributions](#name-additional-licenses-for-iet){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-additional-licenses-for-iet}

There have been contexts where the material in an IETF Contribution is
also available under other license terms. The IETF wishes to be able to
include content that is available under such licenses. It is desirable
to indicate in the IETF Contribution that other licenses are available.
It would be inappropriate and confusing if such additional licenses
restricted the rights the IETF intends to grant in the content of
RFCs.[¶](#section-4.5-1){.pilcrow}

However, the IETF does not wish to have IETF Contributions contain
additional licenses, as that introduces a number of additional
difficulties. Specifically, additional text in the document, and any
additional license referred to by permitted additional text, must not in
any way restrict the rights the IETF intends to grant to others for
using the contents of IETF Contributions.[¶](#section-4.5-2){.pilcrow}

Authors of Contributions retain all rights in their Contributions. As
such, an author may directly grant any rights they wish separately from
what the IETF grants. However, a reader wishing to determine or make use
of such grants will need to either consult external sources of
information, possibly including open source code and documents, or
contact the author directly.[¶](#section-4.5-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

No values are assigned in this document, no registries are created, and
there is no action assigned to the IANA by this document. One list (of
kinds of code sections) is anticipated, to be created and maintained by
the Trustees of the IETF Trust. It is up to the Trustees of the IETF
Trust whether they create such a list and whether they choose to involve
the IANA in maintaining that list.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

This document introduces no new security considerations. It is a process
document about the IETF\'s IPR rights being granted to other people.
While there may be attacks against the integrity or effectiveness of the
IETF processes, this document does not address such
issues.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC5377\]
:   [Halpern, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Advice to the Trustees of the
    IETF Trust on Rights to Be Granted in IETF Documents\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 5377]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5377]{.seriesInfo},
    November 2008, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5377>\>.

\[RFC5378\]
:   [Bradner, S., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and J. Contreras, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Rights Contributors Provide to the IETF Trust\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP
    78]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 5378]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5378]{.seriesInfo}, November 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5378>\>.
:::

::: {#section-7.2 .section}
### [7.2.](#section-7.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC3935\]
:   [Alvestrand, H.]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Mission Statement for the
    IETF\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 95]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 3935]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC3935]{.seriesInfo}, October 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3935>\>.

\[TRUST-LEGAL\]
:   [IETF Trust]{.refAuthor}, [\"Legal Provisions Relating to IETF
    Documents\"]{.refTitle}, March 2015,
    \<[http://trustee.ietf.org/docs/IETF-Trust-License-Policy.pdf](https://trustee.ietf.org/docs/IETF-Trust-License-Policy.pdf)\>.
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Author\'s Address](#name-authors-address){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-address}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Joel M. Halpern ([editor]{.role})]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[P. O. Box 6049]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Leesburg]{.locality}, [VA]{.region} [20178]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <joel.halpern@ericsson.com>
:::
:::
:::
