  RFC 8741           LSP Control Request   March 2020
  ------------------ --------------------- ------------
  Raghuram, et al.   Standards Track       \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8741](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8741){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   March 2020

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    A. Raghuram
    :::

    ::: org
    AT&T
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    A. Goddard
    :::

    ::: org
    AT&T
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Karthik
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems, Inc.
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Sivabalan
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems, Inc.
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Negi
    :::

    ::: org
    Huawei Technologies
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8741 {#rfcnum}

# Ability for a Stateful Path Computation Element (PCE) to Request and Obtain Control of a Label Switched Path (LSP) {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

A stateful Path Computation Element (PCE) retains information about the
placement of Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Traffic Engineering
Label Switched Paths (TE LSPs). When a PCE has stateful control over
LSPs, it may send indications to LSP head-ends to modify the attributes
(especially the paths) of the LSPs. A Path Computation Client (PCC) that
has set up LSPs under local configuration may delegate control of those
LSPs to a stateful PCE.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}

There are use cases in which a stateful PCE may wish to obtain control
of locally configured LSPs that it is aware of but have not been
delegated to the PCE.[¶](#section-abstract-2){.pilcrow}

This document describes an extension to the Path Computation Element
Communication Protocol (PCEP) to enable a PCE to make requests for such
control.[¶](#section-abstract-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8741>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1}
        [2.1](#section-2.1){.xref}.  [Requirements
        Language](#name-requirements-language){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [LSP Control Request
    Flag](#name-lsp-control-request-flag){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Operation](#name-operation){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Manageability
    Considerations](#name-manageability-consideration){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.xref}.  [Control of Function and
        Policy](#name-control-of-function-and-pol){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2}
        [7.2](#section-7.2){.xref}.  [Information and Data
        Models](#name-information-and-data-models){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.3}
        [7.3](#section-7.3){.xref}.  [Liveness Detection and
        Monitoring](#name-liveness-detection-and-moni){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.4}
        [7.4](#section-7.4){.xref}.  [Verify Correct
        Operations](#name-verify-correct-operations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.4.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.5}
        [7.5](#section-7.5){.xref}.  [Requirements on Other
        Protocols](#name-requirements-on-other-proto){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.5.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.6}
        [7.6](#section-7.6){.xref}.  [Impact on Network
        Operations](#name-impact-on-network-operation){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.2.6.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.1}
        [8.1](#section-8.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.2}
        [8.2](#section-8.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Contributors](#name-contributors){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#section-appendix.c){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#Introduction}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

\"Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Extensions for
Stateful PCE\" \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\] specifies a set of
extensions to PCEP \[[RFC5440](#RFC5440){.xref}\] to enable stateful
control of Traffic Engineering Label Switched Paths (TE LSPs) between
and across PCEP sessions in compliance with
\[[RFC4657](#RFC4657){.xref}\]. It includes mechanisms to synchronize
LSP state between Path Computation Clients (PCCs) and PCEs, delegate
control of LSPs to PCEs, and allow PCEs to control the timing and
sequence of path computations within and across PCEP sessions. The
stateful PCEP defines the following two useful network
operations:[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

Delegation:
:   As per \[[RFC8051](#RFC8051){.xref}\], an operation to grant a PCE
    temporary rights to modify a subset of LSP parameters on one or more
    LSPs of a PCC. LSPs are delegated from a PCC to a PCE and are
    referred to as \"delegated\" LSPs.[¶](#section-1-2.2){.pilcrow}

Revocation:
:   As per \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\], an operation performed by a
    PCC on a previously delegated LSP. Revocation revokes the rights
    granted to the PCE in the delegation
    operation.[¶](#section-1-2.4){.pilcrow}

For redundant stateful PCEs ([Section
5.7.4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8231#section-5.7.4){.relref} of
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\]), during a PCE failure, one of the
redundant PCEs might want to request to take control over an LSP. The
redundant PCEs may use a local policy or a proprietary election
mechanism to decide which PCE would take control. In this case, a
mechanism is needed for a stateful PCE to request control of one or more
LSPs from a PCC so that a newly elected primary PCE can request to take
over control.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

In case of virtualized PCEs (vPCEs) running in virtual network function
(VNF) mode, as the computation load in the network increases, a new
instance of vPCE could be instantiated to balance the current load. The
PCEs could use a proprietary algorithm to decide which LSPs can be
assigned to the new vPCE. Thus, having a mechanism for the PCE to
request control of some LSPs is needed.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

In some deployments, the operator would like to use stateful PCE for
global optimization algorithms but would still like to keep the control
of the LSP at the PCC. In such cases, a stateful PCE could request to
take control during the global optimization and return the delegation
once done.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

Note that \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\] specifies a mechanism for a PCC
to delegate an orphaned LSP to another PCE. The mechanism defined in
this document can be used in conjunction with
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\]. Ultimately, it is the PCC that decides
which PCE to delegate the orphaned LSP to.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}

This specification provides a simple extension that allows a PCE to
request control of one or more LSPs from any PCC over the stateful PCEP
session. The procedures for granting and relinquishing control of the
LSPs are specified in accordance with \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\]
unless explicitly set aside in this document.[¶](#section-1-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

This document uses the following terms defined in
\[[RFC5440](#RFC5440){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

PCC:
:   Path Computation Client[¶](#section-2-2.2){.pilcrow}

PCE:
:   Path Computation Element[¶](#section-2-2.4){.pilcrow}

PCEP:
:   Path Computation Element communication
    Protocol[¶](#section-2-2.6){.pilcrow}

This document uses the following terms defined in
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

PCRpt:
:   Path Computation State Report message[¶](#section-2-4.2){.pilcrow}

PCUpd:
:   Path Computation Update Request message[¶](#section-2-4.4){.pilcrow}

PLSP-ID:
:   A PCEP-specific identifier for the LSP[¶](#section-2-4.6){.pilcrow}

SRP:
:   Stateful PCE Request Parameters[¶](#section-2-4.8){.pilcrow}

Readers of this document are expected to have some familiarity with
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-2.1 .section}
### [2.1.](#section-2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Requirements Language](#name-requirements-language){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-requirements-language}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#LSP-Gain-Flag}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [LSP Control Request Flag](#name-lsp-control-request-flag){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-lsp-control-request-flag}

The Stateful PCE Request Parameters (SRP) object is defined in [Section
7.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8231#section-7.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\] and includes a Flags
field.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

A new \"LSP Control Request\" flag (30), also called the C flag, is
introduced in the SRP object. In a PCUpd message, a PCE sets the C flag
to 1 to indicate that it wishes to gain control of LSPs. The LSPs are
identified by the PLSP-ID in the LSP object following the SRP object. A
PLSP-ID value other than 0 and 0xFFFFF is used to identify the LSP for
which the PCE requests control. A PLSP-ID value of 0 indicates that the
PCE is requesting control of all LSPs originating from the PCC that it
wishes to delegate. The C flag has no meaning in other PCEP messages
that carry SRP objects and for which the C flag [MUST]{.bcp14} be set to
0 on transmission and [MUST]{.bcp14} be ignored on
receipt.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

The C flag is ignored in case the R flag \[[RFC8281](#RFC8281){.xref}\]
in the SRP object is set.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Operation}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Operation](#name-operation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-operation}

During normal operation, a PCC that wishes to delegate the control of an
LSP sets the Delegate (D) flag ([Section
7.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8231#section-7.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\]) to 1 in all PCRpt messages pertaining to
the LSP. The PCE confirms the delegation by setting the D flag to 1 in
all PCUpd messages pertaining to the LSP. The PCC revokes the control of
the LSP from the PCE by setting the D flag to 0 in PCRpt messages
pertaining to the LSP. If the PCE wishes to relinquish the control of
the LSP, it sets the D flag to 0 in all PCUpd messages pertaining to the
LSP.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

If a PCE wishes to gain control over an LSP, it sends a PCUpd message
with the C flag set to 1 in the SRP object. The LSP for which the PCE
requests control is identified by the PLSP-ID in the associated LSP
object. A PLSP-ID value of 0 indicates that the PCE wants control over
all LSPs originating from the PCC. An implementation of this feature
needs to make sure to check for the LSP control feature (C flag set to
1) before any check for PLSP-ID (as per \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\]).
The D flag and C flag are mutually exclusive in a PCUpd message. The PCE
[MUST NOT]{.bcp14} send a control request for the LSP that is already
delegated to the PCE, i.e., if the D flag is set in the PCUpd message,
then the C flag [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} be set. If a PCC receives a PCUpd
message with the D flag set in the LSP object (i.e., LSP is already
delegated) and the C flag is also set (i.e., PCE is making a control
request), the PCC [MUST]{.bcp14} ignore the C flag. A PCC can decide to
delegate the control of the LSP at its own discretion. If the PCC grants
or denies the control, it sends a PCRpt message with the D flag set to 1
and 0, respectively, in accordance with stateful PCEP
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\]. If the PCC does not grant the control,
it [MAY]{.bcp14} choose to not respond, and the PCE [MAY]{.bcp14} choose
to retry requesting the control, preferably using an exponentially
increasing timer. Note that, if the PCUpd message with the C flag set is
received for a currently non-delegated LSP (for which the PCE is
requesting delegation), this [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} trigger the error
handling as specified in \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\] (a PCErr with
Error-type=19 (Invalid Operation) and error-value 1 (Attempted LSP
Update Request for a non-delegated LSP)).[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}

As per \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\], a PCC cannot delegate an LSP to
more than one PCE at any time. If a PCE requests control of an LSP that
has already been delegated by the PCC to another PCE, the PCC
[MAY]{.bcp14} ignore the request or [MAY]{.bcp14} revoke the delegation
to the first PCE before delegating it to the second. This choice is a
matter of local policy.[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}

It should be noted that a legacy implementation of PCC that does not
support this extension may receive an LSP control request: a PCUpd
message with the C flag set and the D flag unset. The legacy
implementation would ignore the C flag and trigger the error condition
for the D flag, as specified in \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\] (i.e., a
PCErr with Error-type=19 (Invalid Operation) and error-value 1
(Attempted LSP Update Request for a non-delegated LSP)). Further, in
case of a PLSP-ID value of 0, the error condition, as specified in
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\], (i.e., a PCErr with Error-type=19
(Invalid Operation) and error-value 3 (Attempted LSP Update Request for
an LSP identified by an unknown PLSP-ID)) would be
triggered.[¶](#section-4-4){.pilcrow}

\[[RFC8281](#RFC8281){.xref}\] describes the setup, maintenance, and
teardown of PCE-initiated LSPs under the stateful PCE model. It also
specifies how a PCE may obtain control over an orphaned LSP that was
PCE-initiated. A PCE implementation can apply the mechanism described in
this document in conjunction with those in
\[[RFC8281](#RFC8281){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

The security considerations listed in \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\] and
\[[RFC8281](#RFC8281){.xref}\] apply to this document as well. However,
this document also introduces a new attack vector. An attacker may flood
the PCC with requests to delegate all of its LSPs at a rate that exceeds
the PCC\'s ability to process them, either by spoofing messages or by
compromising the PCE itself. The PCC [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be configured with
a threshold rate for the delegation requests received from the PCE. If
the threshold is reached, it is [RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} to log the
issue.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

A PCC is the ultimate arbiter of delegation. As per
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\], a local policy at the PCC is used to
influence the delegation. A PCC can also revoke the delegation at any
time. A PCC need not blindly trust the control requests and
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} take local policy and other factors into consideration
before honoring the request.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}

Note that a PCE may not be sure if a PCC supports this feature. A PCE
would try sending a control request to a \'legacy\' PCC that would in
turn respond with an error, as described in [Section
4](#Operation){.xref}. So, a PCE would learn this fact only when it
wants to take control over an LSP. A PCE might also be susceptible to
downgrade attacks by falsifying the error
condition.[¶](#section-5-3){.pilcrow}

As per \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\], it is [RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} that
these PCEP extensions only be activated on authenticated and encrypted
sessions across PCEs and PCCs belonging to the same administrative
authority, using Transport Layer Security (TLS)
\[[RFC8253](#RFC8253){.xref}\], as per the recommendations and best
current practices in BCP 195 \[[RFC7525](#RFC7525){.xref}\] (unless
explicitly excluded in
\[[RFC8253](#RFC8253){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-5-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has allocated the following code point in the \"SRP Object Flag
Field\" subregistry in the \"Path Computation Element Protocol (PCEP)
Numbers\" registry.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

  Bit   Description           Reference
  ----- --------------------- -----------
  30    LSP Control Request   RFC 8741

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Manageability Considerations](#name-manageability-consideration){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-manageability-consideration}

All manageability requirements and considerations listed in
\[[RFC5440](#RFC5440){.xref}\] and \[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\] apply
to PCEP extensions defined in this document. In addition, requirements
and considerations listed in this section
apply.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Control of Function and Policy](#name-control-of-function-and-pol){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-control-of-function-and-pol}

A PCC implementation [SHOULD]{.bcp14} allow the operator to configure
the policy rules that specify the conditions under which it honors the
request to control the LSPs. This includes the handling of the case
where an LSP control request is received for an LSP that is currently
delegated to some other PCE. A PCC implementation [SHOULD]{.bcp14} also
allow the operator to configure the threshold rate for the delegation
requests received from the PCE. Further, the operator [MAY]{.bcp14} be
allowed to trigger the LSP control request for a particular LSP at the
PCE. A PCE implementation [SHOULD]{.bcp14} also allow the operator to
configure an exponentially increasing timer to retry the control
requests for which the PCE did not get a
response.[¶](#section-7.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7.2 .section}
### [7.2.](#section-7.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Information and Data Models](#name-information-and-data-models){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-information-and-data-models}

The PCEP YANG module \[[PCEP-YANG](#I-D.ietf-pce-pcep-yang){.xref}\]
could be extended to include a mechanism to trigger the LSP control
request.[¶](#section-7.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7.3 .section}
### [7.3.](#section-7.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Liveness Detection and Monitoring](#name-liveness-detection-and-moni){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-liveness-detection-and-moni}

Mechanisms defined in this document do not imply any new liveness
detection and monitoring requirements in addition to those already
listed in \[[RFC5440](#RFC5440){.xref}\].[¶](#section-7.3-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7.4 .section}
### [7.4.](#section-7.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Verify Correct Operations](#name-verify-correct-operations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-verify-correct-operations}

Mechanisms defined in this document do not imply any new operation
verification requirements in addition to those already listed in
\[[RFC5440](#RFC5440){.xref}\] and
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\].[¶](#section-7.4-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7.5 .section}
### [7.5.](#section-7.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Requirements on Other Protocols](#name-requirements-on-other-proto){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-requirements-on-other-proto}

Mechanisms defined in this document do not imply any new requirements on
other protocols.[¶](#section-7.5-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7.6 .section}
### [7.6.](#section-7.6){.section-number .selfRef} [Impact on Network Operations](#name-impact-on-network-operation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-impact-on-network-operation}

Mechanisms defined in \[[RFC5440](#RFC5440){.xref}\] and
\[[RFC8231](#RFC8231){.xref}\] also apply to PCEP extensions defined in
this document. Further, the mechanism described in this document can
help the operator to request control of the LSPs at a particular
PCE.[¶](#section-7.6-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-8.1 .section}
### [8.1.](#section-8.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.

\[RFC5440\]
:   [Vasseur, JP., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and JL. Le Roux, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Path Computation Element (PCE) Communication Protocol
    (PCEP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5440]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5440]{.seriesInfo}, March 2009,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5440>\>.

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.

\[RFC8231\]
:   [Crabbe, E.]{.refAuthor}[, Minei, I.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Medved, J.]{.refAuthor}[, and R. Varga]{.refAuthor}, [\"Path
    Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Extensions for
    Stateful PCE\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8231]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8231]{.seriesInfo}, September 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8231>\>.

\[RFC8281\]
:   [Crabbe, E.]{.refAuthor}[, Minei, I.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Sivabalan, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and R. Varga]{.refAuthor}, [\"Path
    Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Extensions for
    PCE-Initiated LSP Setup in a Stateful PCE Model\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8281]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8281]{.seriesInfo}, December
    2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8281>\>.
:::

::: {#section-8.2 .section}
### [8.2.](#section-8.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[PCEP-YANG\]
:   [Dhody, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Hardwick, J.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Beeram, V.]{.refAuthor}[, and J. Tantsura]{.refAuthor}, [\"A YANG
    Data Model for Path Computation Element Communications Protocol
    (PCEP)\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-pce-pcep-yang-13]{.seriesInfo}, 31
    October 2019,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-pce-pcep-yang-13>\>.

\[RFC4657\]
:   [Ash, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and J.L. Le Roux, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Path Computation Element (PCE) Communication Protocol Generic
    Requirements\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4657]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4657]{.seriesInfo}, September 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4657>\>.

\[RFC7525\]
:   [Sheffer, Y.]{.refAuthor}[, Holz, R.]{.refAuthor}[, and P.
    Saint-Andre]{.refAuthor}, [\"Recommendations for Secure Use of
    Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security
    (DTLS)\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 195]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    7525]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7525]{.seriesInfo}, May 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7525>\>.

\[RFC8051\]
:   [Zhang, X., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and I. Minei, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Applicability of a Stateful Path Computation Element
    (PCE)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8051]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8051]{.seriesInfo}, January 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8051>\>.

\[RFC8253\]
:   [Lopez, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Gonzalez de Dios, O.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Wu, Q.]{.refAuthor}[, and D. Dhody]{.refAuthor}, [\"PCEPS: Usage of
    TLS to Provide a Secure Transport for the Path Computation Element
    Communication Protocol (PCEP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8253]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8253]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8253>\>.
:::
:::

::: {#Acknowledgement}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

Thanks to [Jonathan Hardwick]{.contact-name} for reminding the authors
to not use suggested values in IANA
section.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}

Thanks to [Adrian Farrel]{.contact-name}, [Haomian
Zheng]{.contact-name}, and [Tomonori Takeda]{.contact-name} for their
valuable comments.[¶](#section-appendix.a-2){.pilcrow}

Thanks to [Shawn M. Emery]{.contact-name} for his Security Directorate
review.[¶](#section-appendix.a-3){.pilcrow}

Thanks to [Francesca Palombini]{.contact-name} for GENART
review.[¶](#section-appendix.a-4){.pilcrow}

Thanks to [Benjamin Kaduk]{.contact-name}, [Martin
Vigoureux]{.contact-name}, [Alvaro Retana]{.contact-name}, and [Barry
Leiba]{.contact-name} for IESG
reviews.[¶](#section-appendix.a-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#contributors}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Contributors](#name-contributors){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-contributors}

The following people contributed substantially to the content of this
document and should be considered
coauthors:[¶](#section-appendix.b-1){.pilcrow}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Dhruv Dhody]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Huawei Technologies]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Divyashree Techno Park, Whitefield]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Bangalore]{.locality} [560066]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Karnataka]{.region}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[India]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <dhruv.ietf@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jon Parker]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems, Inc.]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[2000 Innovation Drive]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Kanata]{.locality} [Ontario]{.region} [K2K 3E8]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Canada]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <jdparker@cisco.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Chaitanya Yadlapalli]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[AT&T]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[200 S Laurel Avenue]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Middletown]{.locality}, [NJ]{.region} [07748]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <cy098@att.com>
:::
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.c .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Aswatnarayan Raghuram]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[AT&T]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[200 S Laurel Avenue]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Middletown]{.locality}, [NJ]{.region} [07748]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <ar2521@att.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Al Goddard]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[AT&T]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[200 S Laurel Avenue]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Middletown]{.locality}, [NJ]{.region} [07748]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <ag6941@att.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jay Karthik]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems, Inc.]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[125 High Street]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Boston]{.locality}, [Massachusetts]{.region} [02110]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <jakarthi@cisco.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Siva Sivabalan]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems, Inc.]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[2000 Innovation Drive]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Kanata]{.locality} [Ontario]{.region} [K2K 3E8]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Canada]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <msiva@cisco.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mahendra Singh Negi]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Huawei Technologies]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Divyashree Techno Park, Whitefield]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Bangalore]{.locality} [560066]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Karnataka]{.region}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[India]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <mahend.ietf@gmail.com>
:::
:::
:::
