  RFC 8781            Discovering PREF64 in Router Advertisements   April 2020
  ------------------- --------------------------------------------- ------------
  Colitti & Linkova   Standards Track                               \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8781](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8781){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   April 2020

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    L. Colitti
    :::

    ::: org
    Google
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Linkova
    :::

    ::: org
    Google
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8781 {#rfcnum}

# Discovering PREF64 in Router Advertisements {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document specifies a Neighbor Discovery option to be used in Router
Advertisements (RAs) to communicate prefixes of Network Address and
Protocol Translation from IPv6 clients to IPv4 servers (NAT64) to
hosts.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8781>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1}
        [1.1](#section-1.1){.xref}.  [Requirements
        Language](#name-requirements-language){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.2}
        [1.2](#section-1.2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Use Cases for Communicating the NAT64
    Prefix to
    Hosts](#name-use-cases-for-communicating){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Why Include the NAT64 Prefix in Router
    Advertisements?](#name-why-include-the-nat64-prefi){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Option
    Format](#name-option-format){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [Scaled Lifetime
        Processing](#name-scaled-lifetime-processing){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Usage
    Guidelines](#name-usage-guidelines){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [Handling Multiple NAT64
        Prefixes](#name-handling-multiple-nat64-pre){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [PREF64
        Consistency](#name-pref64-consistency){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.1}
        [8.1](#section-8.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.2}
        [8.2](#section-8.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

NAT64 \[[RFC6146](#RFC6146){.xref}\] with DNS Extensions for Network
Address Translation from IPv6 clients to IPv4 servers (DNS64)
\[[RFC6147](#RFC6147){.xref}\] is a widely deployed mechanism to provide
IPv4 access on IPv6-only networks. In various scenarios, the host must
be aware of the NAT64 prefix in use by the network. This document
specifies a Neighbor Discovery \[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\] option to
be used in Router Advertisements (RAs) to communicate NAT64 prefixes to
hosts.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-1.1 .section}
### [1.1.](#section-1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Requirements Language](#name-requirements-language){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-requirements-language}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-1.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-1.2 .section}
### [1.2.](#section-1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

PREF64 (or NAT64 prefix):
:   An IPv6 prefix used for IPv6 address synthesis
    \[[RFC6146](#RFC6146){.xref}\];[¶](#section-1.2-1.2){.pilcrow}
:   

NAT64:
:   Network Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6 clients to IPv4
    servers
    \[[RFC6146](#RFC6146){.xref}\];[¶](#section-1.2-1.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Router Advertisement (RA):
:   A message used by IPv6 routers to advertise their presence together
    with various link and Internet parameters
    \[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\];[¶](#section-1.2-1.6){.pilcrow}
:   

DNS64: a mechanism for synthesizing AAAA records from A records
\[[RFC6147](#RFC6147){.xref}\];[¶](#section-1.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Use Cases for Communicating the NAT64 Prefix to Hosts](#name-use-cases-for-communicating){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-use-cases-for-communicating}

On networks employing NAT64, it is useful for hosts to know the NAT64
prefix for several reasons, including the
following:[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-2-2.1}
    Enabling DNS64 functions on end hosts. In
    particular:[¶](#section-2-2.1.1){.pilcrow}

    -   [Local DNSSEC validation (DNS64 in stub-resolver mode). As
        discussed in \[[RFC6147](#RFC6147){.xref}\], [Section
        2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6147#section-2){.relref},
        the stub resolver in the host \"will try to obtain (real) AAAA
        RRs, and in case they are not available, the DNS64 function will
        synthesize AAAA RRs for internal usage.\" Therefore, to perform
        the DNS64 function, the stub resolver needs to know the NAT64
        prefix. This is required in order to use DNSSEC on a NAT64
        network.[¶](#section-2-2.1.2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.1.2.1}
    -   [Trusted DNS server. AAAA synthesis is required for the host to
        be able to use a DNS server not provided by the network (e.g., a
        DNS-over-TLS \[[RFC7858](#RFC7858){.xref}\] or DNS-over-HTTPS
        \[[RFC8484](#RFC8484){.xref}\] server with which the host has an
        existing trust
        relationship).[¶](#section-2-2.1.2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.1.2.2}
    -   [Networks with no DNS64 server. Hosts that support AAAA
        synthesis and are aware of the NAT64 prefix in use do not need
        the network to perform the DNS64 function at
        all.[¶](#section-2-2.1.2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.1.2.3}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-2-2.2}
    Enabling NAT64 address-translation functions on end hosts. For
    example:[¶](#section-2-2.2.1){.pilcrow}

    -   [IPv4 address literals on an IPv6-only host. As described in
        \[[RFC8305](#RFC8305){.xref}\], [Section
        7.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8305#section-7.1){.relref},
        IPv6-only hosts connecting to IPv4 address literals can
        translate the IPv4 literal to an IPv6
        literal.[¶](#section-2-2.2.2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.2.2.1}
    -   [464XLAT \[[RFC6877](#RFC6877){.xref}\]. 464XLAT requires the
        host be aware of the NAT64
        prefix.[¶](#section-2-2.2.2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.2.2.2}
    :::
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Why Include the NAT64 Prefix in Router Advertisements?](#name-why-include-the-nat64-prefi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-why-include-the-nat64-prefi}

Fate sharing:
:   NAT64 requires routing to be configured. IPv6 routing configuration
    requires receiving an IPv6 RA \[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\].
    Therefore, using RAs to provide hosts with the NAT64 prefix ensures
    that NAT64 reachability information shares the fate of the rest of
    the network configuration on the host.[¶](#section-3-1.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Atomic configuration:
:   Including the NAT64 prefix in the RA minimizes the number of packets
    required to configure a host. Only one packet (an RA) is required to
    complete the network configuration. This speeds up the process of
    connecting to a network that supports NAT64/DNS64. It also
    simplifies host implementation by removing the possibility that the
    host can have an incomplete Layer 3 configuration (e.g., IPv6
    addresses and prefixes, but no NAT64
    prefix).[¶](#section-3-1.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Updatability:
:   It is possible to change the NAT64 prefix at any time, because when
    it changes, it is possible to notify hosts by sending a new
    RA.[¶](#section-3-1.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Deployability:
:   All IPv6 hosts and networks are required to support Neighbor
    Discovery \[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\] so just a minor extension
    to the existing implementation is required. Other options, such as
    \[[RFC7225](#RFC7225){.xref}\], require implementing other protocols
    (e.g., Port Control Protocol (PCP) \[[RFC7225](#RFC7225){.xref}\]),
    which could be considered an obstacle for
    deployment.[¶](#section-3-1.8){.pilcrow}
:   
:::

::: {#Format}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Option Format](#name-option-format){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-option-format}

[]{#name-nat64-prefix-option-format}

::: {#fig_Option}
::: {#section-4-1.1 .artwork .art-text .alignCenter}
     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |     Type      |    Length     |     Scaled Lifetime     | PLC |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                                                               |
    +                                                               +
    |              Highest 96 bits of the Prefix                    |
    +                                                               +
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [NAT64 Prefix Option
Format](#name-nat64-prefix-option-format){.selfRef}
:::

Fields:[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}

Type:
:   8-bit identifier of the PREF64 option type
    (38)[¶](#section-4-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Length:
:   8-bit unsigned integer. The length of the option (including the Type
    and Length fields) is in units of 8 octets. The sender
    [MUST]{.bcp14} set the length to 2. The receiver [MUST]{.bcp14}
    ignore the PREF64 option if the Length field value is not
    2.[¶](#section-4-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Scaled Lifetime:
:   13-bit unsigned integer. The maximum time in units of 8 seconds over
    which this NAT64 prefix [MAY]{.bcp14} be used. See [Section
    4.1](#lifetime){.xref} for the Scaled Lifetime field processing
    rules.[¶](#section-4-3.6){.pilcrow}
:   

PLC (Prefix Length Code):
:   3-bit unsigned integer. This field encodes the NAT64 Prefix Length
    defined in \[[RFC6052](#RFC6052){.xref}\]. The PLC field values 0,
    1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 indicate the NAT64 prefix length of 96, 64, 56,
    48, 40, and 32 bits, respectively. The receiver [MUST]{.bcp14}
    ignore the PREF64 option if the Prefix Length Code field is not set
    to one of those values.[¶](#section-4-3.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Highest 96 bits of the Prefix:
:   96-bit unsigned integer. Contains bits 0 - 95 of the NAT64
    prefix.[¶](#section-4-3.10){.pilcrow}
:   

::: {#lifetime}
::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Scaled Lifetime Processing](#name-scaled-lifetime-processing){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-scaled-lifetime-processing}

It would be highly undesirable for the NAT64 prefix to have a lifetime
shorter than the Router Lifetime, which is defined in [Section
4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4861#section-4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\] as a 16-bit unsigned integer. If the
NAT64 prefix lifetime is not at least equal to the default Router
Lifetime, it might lead to scenarios in which the NAT64 prefix lifetime
expires before the arrival of the next unsolicited RA. Therefore, the
Scaled Lifetime encodes the NAT64 prefix lifetime in units of 8 seconds.
The receiver [MUST]{.bcp14} multiply the Scaled Lifetime value by 8 (for
example, by a logical left shift) to calculate the maximum time in
seconds the prefix [MAY]{.bcp14} be used. The maximum lifetime of the
NAT64 prefix is thus 65528 seconds. To ensure that the NAT64 prefix does
not expire before the default router, it is [NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} to
configure default Router Lifetimes greater than 65528 seconds when using
this option. A lifetime of 0 indicates that the prefix [SHOULD
NOT]{.bcp14} be used anymore.[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}

By default, the value of the Scaled Lifetime field [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be
set to the lesser of 3 x MaxRtrAdvInterval
\[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\] divided by 8, or
8191.[¶](#section-4.1-2){.pilcrow}

Router vendors [SHOULD]{.bcp14} allow administrators to specify nonzero
lifetime values that are not divisible by 8. In such cases, the router
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} round the provided value up to the nearest integer that
is divisible by 8 and smaller than 65536, then divide the result by 8
(or perform a logical right shift by 3) and set the Scaled Lifetime
field to the resulting value. If a nonzero lifetime value that is to be
divided by 8 (or subjected to a logical right shift by 3) is less than
8, then the Scaled Lifetime field [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be set to 1. This
last step ensures that lifetimes under 8 seconds are encoded as a
nonzero Scaled Lifetime.[¶](#section-4.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Usage Guidelines](#name-usage-guidelines){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-usage-guidelines}

This option specifies exactly one NAT64 prefix for all IPv4
destinations. If the network operator wants to route different parts of
the IPv4 address space to different NAT64 devices, this can be
accomplished by routing more specific subprefixes of the NAT64 prefix to
those devices. For example, suppose an operator is using the
\[[RFC1918](#RFC1918){.xref}\] address space 10.0.0.0/8 internally. That
operator might want to route 10.0.0.0/8 through NAT64 device A, and the
rest of the IPv4 space through NAT64 device B. If the operator\'s NAT64
prefix is 2001:db8:a:b::/96, then the operator can route
2001:db8:a:b::a00:0/104 to NAT64 A and 2001:db8:a:b::/96 to NAT64
B.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

This option may appear more than once in an RA (e.g., when gracefully
renumbering the network from one NAT64 prefix to another). Host behavior
with regard to synthesizing IPv6 addresses from IPv4 addresses
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} follow the recommendations given in [Section
3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7050#section-3){.relref} of
\[[RFC7050](#RFC7050){.xref}\], limited to the NAT64 prefixes that have
a nonzero lifetime.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}

In a network (or a provisioning domain) that provides both IPv4 and
NAT64, it may be desirable for certain IPv4 addresses not to be
translated. An example might be private address ranges that are local to
the network/provisioning domain and that should not be reached through
the NAT64. This type of configuration cannot be conveyed to hosts using
this option, or through other NAT64 prefix provisioning mechanisms such
as \[[RFC7050](#RFC7050){.xref}\] or \[[RFC7225](#RFC7225){.xref}\].
This problem does not apply in IPv6-only networks: the host in an
IPv6-only network does not have an IPv4 address and cannot reach any
IPv4 destinations without the NAT64.[¶](#section-5-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#mult_src}
::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Handling Multiple NAT64 Prefixes](#name-handling-multiple-nat64-pre){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-handling-multiple-nat64-pre}

In some cases, a host may receive multiple NAT64 prefixes from different
sources. Possible scenarios include (but are not limited
to):[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

-   [the host is using multiple mechanisms to discover PREF64 prefixes
    (e.g., by using PCP \[[RFC7225](#RFC7225){.xref}\]) and/or resolving
    an IPv4-only fully qualified domain name
    \[[RFC7050](#RFC7050){.xref}\] in addition to receiving the PREF64
    RA option);[¶](#section-5.1-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.1-2.1}
-   [the PREF64 option presents in a single RA more than
    once;[¶](#section-5.1-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.1-2.2}
-   [the host receives multiple RAs with different PREF64 prefixes on a
    given interface.[¶](#section-5.1-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.1-2.3}

When multiple PREF64s are discovered via the RA PREF64 Option (either
the Option presents more than once in a single RA or multiple RAs are
received), host behavior with regard to synthesizing IPv6 addresses from
IPv4 addresses [SHOULD]{.bcp14} follow the recommendations given in
[Section 3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7050#section-3){.relref}
of \[[RFC7050](#RFC7050){.xref}\], limited to the NAT64 prefixes that
have a nonzero lifetime.[¶](#section-5.1-3){.pilcrow}

When different PREF64s are discovered using multiple mechanisms, hosts
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} select one source of information only. The
[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} order is:[¶](#section-5.1-4){.pilcrow}

-   [PCP-discovered prefixes \[[RFC7225](#RFC7225){.xref}\], if
    supported;[¶](#section-5.1-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.1-5.1}
-   [PREF64s discovered via the RA
    Option;[¶](#section-5.1-5.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.1-5.2}
-   [PREF64s resolving an IPv4-only fully qualified domain name
    \[[RFC7050](#RFC7050){.xref}\][¶](#section-5.1-5.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.1-5.3}

Note: If the network provides PREF64s via both this RA Option and
\[[RFC7225](#RFC7225){.xref}\], hosts that receive the PREF64 via the RA
Option may choose to use it immediately (before waiting for the PCP to
complete); therefore, some traffic may not reflect any more detailed
configuration provided by the PCP.[¶](#section-5.1-6){.pilcrow}

The host [SHOULD]{.bcp14} treat the PREF64 as being specific to the
network interface it was received on. Hosts that are aware of
Provisioning Domain (PvD, \[[RFC7556](#RFC7556){.xref}\]) [MUST]{.bcp14}
treat the PREF64 as being scoped to the implicit or explicit
PvD.[¶](#section-5.1-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#cons}
::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [PREF64 Consistency](#name-pref64-consistency){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-pref64-consistency}

[Section
6.2.7](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4861#section-6.2.7){.relref} of
\[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\] recommends that routers inspect RAs sent
by other routers to ensure that all routers onlink advertise consistent
information. Routers [SHOULD]{.bcp14} inspect valid PREF64 options
received on a given link and verify the consistency. Detected
inconsistencies indicate that one or more routers might be
misconfigured. Routers [SHOULD]{.bcp14} log such cases to system or
network management. Routers [SHOULD]{.bcp14} check and compare the
following information:[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}

-   [set of PREF64s with a nonzero
    lifetime;[¶](#section-5.2-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.1}
-   [set of PREF64s with a zero
    lifetime.[¶](#section-5.2-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.2}

Routers that are aware of PvD (\[[RFC7556](#RFC7556){.xref}\])
[MUST]{.bcp14} only compare information scoped to the same implicit or
explicit PvD.[¶](#section-5.2-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#IANA-con}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has assigned a new IPv6 Neighbor Discovery Option type for the
PREF64 option defined in this document in the \"IPv6 Neighbor Discovery
Option Formats\" registry
\[[IANA](#IANA){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-new-iana-registry-assignmen}

::: {#option_table}
  Description     Type
  --------------- ------
  PREF64 option   38

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [New IANA Registry
  Assignment](#name-new-iana-registry-assignmen){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

Because RAs are required in all IPv6 configuration scenarios, on
IPv6-only networks, RAs must already be secured \-- e.g., by deploying
an RA-Guard \[[RFC6105](#RFC6105){.xref}\]. Providing all configuration
in RAs reduces the attack surface to be targeted by malicious attackers
trying to provide hosts with invalid configuration, as compared to
distributing the configuration through multiple different mechanisms
that need to be secured independently.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

If a host is provided with an incorrect NAT64 prefix, the IPv6-only host
might not be able to communicate with IPv4-only destinations.
Connectivity to destinations reachable over IPv6 would not be impacted
just by providing a host with an incorrect prefix; however, if attackers
are capable of sending rogue RAs, they can perform denial-of-service or
man-in-the-middle attacks, as described in
\[[RFC6104](#RFC6104){.xref}\].[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}

The security measures that must already be in place to ensure that RAs
are only received from legitimate sources eliminate the problem of NAT64
prefix validation described in [Section
3.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7050#section-3.1){.relref} of
\[[RFC7050](#RFC7050){.xref}\].[¶](#section-7-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-8.1 .section}
### [8.1.](#section-8.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[IANA\]
:   [IANA]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet Control Message Protocol version 6
    (ICMPv6) Parameters\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.iana.org/assignments/icmpv6-parameters>\>.
:   

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC4861\]
:   [Narten, T.]{.refAuthor}[, Nordmark, E.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Simpson, W.]{.refAuthor}[, and H. Soliman]{.refAuthor}, [\"Neighbor
    Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4861]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4861]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2007, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4861>\>.
:   

\[RFC6052\]
:   [Bao, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Huitema, C.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Bagnulo, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Boucadair, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and X.
    Li]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6 Addressing of IPv4/IPv6
    Translators\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6052]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6052]{.seriesInfo}, October 2010,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6052>\>.
:   

\[RFC7050\]
:   [Savolainen, T.]{.refAuthor}[, Korhonen, J.]{.refAuthor}[, and D.
    Wing]{.refAuthor}, [\"Discovery of the IPv6 Prefix Used for IPv6
    Address Synthesis\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7050]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7050]{.seriesInfo}, November 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7050>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-8.2 .section}
### [8.2.](#section-8.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC1918\]
:   [Rekhter, Y.]{.refAuthor}[, Moskowitz, B.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Karrenberg, D.]{.refAuthor}[, de Groot, G. J.]{.refAuthor}[, and E.
    Lear]{.refAuthor}, [\"Address Allocation for Private
    Internets\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 5]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    1918]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC1918]{.seriesInfo}, February
    1996, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1918>\>.
:   

\[RFC6104\]
:   [Chown, T.]{.refAuthor}[ and S. Venaas]{.refAuthor}, [\"Rogue IPv6
    Router Advertisement Problem Statement\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6104]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6104]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2011, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6104>\>.
:   

\[RFC6105\]
:   [Levy-Abegnoli, E.]{.refAuthor}[, Van de Velde, G.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Popoviciu, C.]{.refAuthor}[, and J. Mohacsi]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6
    Router Advertisement Guard\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6105]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC6105]{.seriesInfo}, February 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6105>\>.
:   

\[RFC6146\]
:   [Bagnulo, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Matthews, P.]{.refAuthor}[, and I. van
    Beijnum]{.refAuthor}, [\"Stateful NAT64: Network Address and
    Protocol Translation from IPv6 Clients to IPv4
    Servers\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6146]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6146]{.seriesInfo}, April 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6146>\>.
:   

\[RFC6147\]
:   [Bagnulo, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Sullivan, A.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Matthews, P.]{.refAuthor}[, and I. van Beijnum]{.refAuthor},
    [\"DNS64: DNS Extensions for Network Address Translation from IPv6
    Clients to IPv4 Servers\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6147]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6147]{.seriesInfo}, April 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6147>\>.
:   

\[RFC6877\]
:   [Mawatari, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Kawashima, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and C.
    Byrne]{.refAuthor}, [\"464XLAT: Combination of Stateful and
    Stateless Translation\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6877]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6877]{.seriesInfo}, April 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6877>\>.
:   

\[RFC7225\]
:   [Boucadair, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Discovering NAT64 IPv6 Prefixes
    Using the Port Control Protocol (PCP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7225]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7225]{.seriesInfo}, May 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7225>\>.
:   

\[RFC7556\]
:   [Anipko, D., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Multiple Provisioning Domain
    Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7556]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7556]{.seriesInfo}, June 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7556>\>.
:   

\[RFC7858\]
:   [Hu, Z.]{.refAuthor}[, Zhu, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Heidemann, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Mankin, A.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Wessels, D.]{.refAuthor}[, and P. Hoffman]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Specification for DNS over Transport Layer Security
    (TLS)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7858]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7858]{.seriesInfo}, May 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7858>\>.
:   

\[RFC8305\]
:   [Schinazi, D.]{.refAuthor}[ and T. Pauly]{.refAuthor}, [\"Happy
    Eyeballs Version 2: Better Connectivity Using
    Concurrency\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8305]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8305]{.seriesInfo}, December 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8305>\>.
:   

\[RFC8484\]
:   [Hoffman, P.]{.refAuthor}[ and P. McManus]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS
    Queries over HTTPS (DoH)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8484]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC8484]{.seriesInfo}, October 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8484>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#Acknowledgements}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

Thanks to the following people (in alphabetical order) for their review
and feedback: [Mikael Abrahamsson]{.contact-name}, [Mark
Andrews]{.contact-name}, [Brian E Carpenter]{.contact-name}, [David
Farmer]{.contact-name}, [Nick Heatley]{.contact-name}, [Robert
Hinden]{.contact-name}, [Martin Hunek]{.contact-name}, [Tatuya
Jinmei]{.contact-name}, [Benjamin Kaduk]{.contact-name}, [Erik
Kline]{.contact-name}, [Suresh Krishnan]{.contact-name}, [Warren
Kumari]{.contact-name}, [David Lamparter]{.contact-name}, [Barry
Leiba]{.contact-name}, [Jordi Palet Martinez]{.contact-name}, [Tommy
Pauly]{.contact-name}, [Alexandre Petrescu]{.contact-name}, [Michael
Richardson]{.contact-name}, [David Schinazi]{.contact-name}, [Ole
Troan]{.contact-name}, [Eric Vynke]{.contact-name}, [Bernie
Volz]{.contact-name}.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Lorenzo Colitti]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Google]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Shibuya 3-21-3]{.street-address}, [Tokyo]{.region}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[150-0002]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Japan]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <lorenzo@google.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jen Linkova]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Google]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[1 Darling Island Rd]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Pyrmont]{.locality} [NSW]{.region} [2009]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Australia]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <furry@google.com>
:::
:::
:::
