  RFC 8799          Limited Domains   July 2020
  ----------------- ----------------- -----------
  Carpenter & Liu   Informational     \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Independent Submission

RFC:
:   [8799](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8799){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   July 2020

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    B. Carpenter
    :::

    ::: org
    Univ. of Auckland
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    B. Liu
    :::

    ::: org
    Huawei Technologies
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8799 {#rfcnum}

# Limited Domains and Internet Protocols {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

There is a noticeable trend towards network behaviors and semantics that
are specific to a particular set of requirements applied within a
limited region of the Internet. Policies, default parameters, the
options supported, the style of network management, and security
requirements may vary between such limited regions. This document
reviews examples of such limited domains (also known as controlled
environments), notes emerging solutions, and includes a related
taxonomy. It then briefly discusses the standardization of protocols for
limited domains. Finally, it shows the need for a precise definition of
\"limited domain membership\" and for mechanisms to allow nodes to join
a domain securely and to find other members, including boundary
nodes.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}

This document is the product of the research of the authors. It has been
produced through discussions and consultation within the IETF but is not
the product of IETF consensus.[¶](#section-abstract-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This is a contribution to the RFC Series, independently of any other RFC
stream. The RFC Editor has chosen to publish this document at its
discretion and makes no statement about its value for implementation or
deployment. Documents approved for publication by the RFC Editor are not
candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8799>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Failure Modes in Today\'s
    Internet](#name-failure-modes-in-todays-int){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Examples of Limited Domain
    Requirements](#name-examples-of-limited-domain-){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Examples of Limited Domain
    Solutions](#name-examples-of-limited-domain-s){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [The Scope of Protocols in Limited
    Domains](#name-the-scope-of-protocols-in-l){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Functional Requirements of Limited
    Domains](#name-functional-requirements-of-){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Informative
    References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [Appendix A](#section-appendix.a){.xref}.  [Taxonomy of Limited
    Domains](#name-taxonomy-of-limited-domains){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.1}
        [A.1](#section-a.1){.xref}.  [Domain as a
        Whole](#name-domain-as-a-whole){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.2}
        [A.2](#section-a.2){.xref}.  [Individual
        Nodes](#name-individual-nodes){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.3}
        [A.3](#section-a.3){.xref}.  [Domain
        Boundary](#name-domain-boundary){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.4}
        [A.4](#section-a.4){.xref}.  [Topology](#name-topology){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.4.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.5}
        [A.5](#section-a.5){.xref}.  [Technology](#name-technology){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.5.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.6}
        [A.6](#section-a.6){.xref}.  [Connection to the
        Internet](#name-connection-to-the-internet){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.6.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.7}
        [A.7](#section-a.7){.xref}.  [Security, Trust, and Privacy
        Model](#name-security-trust-and-privacy-){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.7.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.8}
        [A.8](#section-a.8){.xref}.  [Operations](#name-operations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.8.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.9}
        [A.9](#section-a.9){.xref}.  [Making Use of This
        Taxonomy](#name-making-use-of-this-taxonomy){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.9.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [](#section-appendix.c){.xref}[Contributors](#name-contributors){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.12.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.13}
    [](#section-appendix.d){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.13.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#intro}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

As the Internet continues to grow and diversify, with a realistic
prospect of tens of billions of nodes being connected directly and
indirectly, there is a noticeable trend towards network-specific and
local requirements, behaviors, and semantics. The word \"local\" should
be understood in a special sense, however. In some cases, it may refer
to geographical and physical locality \-- all the nodes in a single
building, on a single campus, or in a given vehicle. In other cases, it
may refer to a defined set of users or nodes distributed over a much
wider area, but drawn together by a single virtual network over the
Internet, or a single physical network running in parallel with the
Internet. We expand on these possibilities below. To capture the topic,
this document refers to such networks as \"limited domains\". Of course,
a similar situation may arise for a network that is completely
disconnected from the Internet, but that is not our direct concern here.
However, it should not be forgotten that interoperability is needed even
within a disconnected network.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

Some people have concerns about splintering of the Internet along
political or linguistic boundaries by mechanisms that block the free
flow of information. That is not the topic of this document, which does
not discuss filtering mechanisms (see \[[RFC7754](#RFC7754){.xref}\])
and does not apply to protocols that are designed for use across the
whole Internet. It is only concerned with domains that have specific
technical requirements.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

The word \"domain\" in this document does not refer to naming domains in
the DNS, although in some cases, a limited domain might incidentally be
congruent with a DNS domain. In particular, with a \"split horizon\" DNS
configuration \[[RFC6950](#RFC6950){.xref}\], the split might be at the
edge of a limited domain. A recent proposal for defining definite
perimeters within the DNS namespace
\[[DNS-PERIMETER](#I-D.dcrocker-dns-perimeter){.xref}\] might also be
considered to be a limited domain mechanism.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Another term that has been used in some contexts is \"controlled
environment\". For example, \[[RFC8085](#RFC8085){.xref}\] uses this to
delimit the operational scope within which a particular tunnel
encapsulation might be used. A specific example is GRE-in-UDP
encapsulation \[[RFC8086](#RFC8086){.xref}\], which explicitly states
that \"The controlled environment has less restrictive requirements than
the general Internet.\" For example, non-congestion-controlled traffic
might be acceptable within the controlled environment. The same phrase
has been used to delimit the useful scope of quality-of-service
protocols \[[RFC6398](#RFC6398){.xref}\]. It is not necessarily the case
that protocols will fail to operate outside the controlled environment,
but rather that they might not operate optimally. In this document, we
assume that \"limited domain\" and \"controlled environment\" mean the
same thing in practice. The term \"managed network\" has been used in a
similar way, e.g., \[[RFC6947](#RFC6947){.xref}\]. In the context of
secure multicast, a \"group domain of interpretation\" is defined by
\[[RFC6407](#RFC6407){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

Yet more definitions of types of domains are to be found in the routing
area, such as \[[RFC4397](#RFC4397){.xref}\],
\[[RFC4427](#RFC4427){.xref}\], and \[[RFC4655](#RFC4655){.xref}\]. We
conclude that the notion of a limited domain is very widespread in many
aspects of Internet technology.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

The requirements of limited domains will depend on the deployment
scenario. Policies, default parameters, and the options supported may
vary. Also, the style of network management may vary between a
completely unmanaged network, one with fully autonomic management, one
with traditional central management, and mixtures of the above. Finally,
the requirements and solutions for security and privacy may
vary.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}

This document analyzes and discusses some of the consequences of this
trend and how it may impact the idea of universal interoperability in
the Internet. First, we list examples of limited domain scenarios and of
technical solutions for limited domains, with the main focus being the
Internet layer of the protocol stack. An appendix provides a taxonomy of
the features to be found in limited domains. With this background, we
discuss the resulting challenge to the idea that all Internet standards
must be universal in scope and applicability. To the contrary, we assert
that some protocols, although needing to be standardized and
interoperable, also need to be specifically limited in their
applicability. This implies that the concepts of a limited domain, and
of its membership, need to be formalized and supported by secure
mechanisms. While this document does not propose a design for such
mechanisms, it does outline some functional
requirements.[¶](#section-1-7){.pilcrow}

This document is the product of the research of the authors. It has been
produced through discussions and consultation within the IETF but is not
the product of IETF consensus.[¶](#section-1-8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#fail}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Failure Modes in Today\'s Internet](#name-failure-modes-in-todays-int){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-failure-modes-in-todays-int}

Today, the Internet does not have a well-defined concept of limited
domains. One result of this is that certain protocols and features fail
on certain paths. Earlier analyses of this topic have focused either on
the loss of transparency of the Internet \[[RFC2775](#RFC2775){.xref}\]
\[[RFC4924](#RFC4924){.xref}\] or on the middleboxes responsible for
that loss \[[RFC3234](#RFC3234){.xref}\] \[[RFC7663](#RFC7663){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8517](#RFC8517){.xref}\]. Unfortunately, the problems persist both
in application protocols and even in very fundamental mechanisms. For
example, the Internet is not transparent to IPv6 extension headers
\[[RFC7872](#RFC7872){.xref}\], and Path MTU Discovery has been
unreliable for many years \[[RFC2923](#RFC2923){.xref}\]
\[[RFC4821](#RFC4821){.xref}\]. IP fragmentation is also unreliable
\[[FRAG-FRAGILE](#I-D.ietf-intarea-frag-fragile){.xref}\], and problems
in TCP MSS negotiation have been reported
\[[IPV6-USE-MINMTU](#I-D.andrews-tcp-and-ipv6-use-minmtu){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

On the security side, the widespread insertion of firewalls at domain
boundaries that are perceived by humans but unknown to protocols results
in arbitrary failure modes as far as the application layer is concerned.
There are operational recommendations and practices that effectively
guarantee arbitrary failures in realistic scenarios
\[[IPV6-EXT-HEADERS](#I-D.ietf-opsec-ipv6-eh-filtering){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

Domain boundaries that are defined administratively (e.g., by address
filtering rules in routers) are prone to leakage caused by human error,
especially if the limited domain traffic appears otherwise normal to the
boundary routers. In this case, the network operator needs to take
active steps to protect the boundary. This form of leakage is much less
likely if nodes must be explicitly configured to handle a given
limited-domain protocol, for example, by installing a specific protocol
handler.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

Investigations of the unreliability of IP fragmentation
\[[FRAG-FRAGILE](#I-D.ietf-intarea-frag-fragile){.xref}\] and the
filtering of IPv6 extension headers \[[RFC7872](#RFC7872){.xref}\]
strongly suggest that at least for some protocol elements, transparency
is a lost cause and middleboxes are here to stay. In the following two
sections, we show that some application environments require protocol
features that cannot, or should not, cross the whole
Internet.[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#example-req}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Examples of Limited Domain Requirements](#name-examples-of-limited-domain-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-examples-of-limited-domain-}

This section describes various examples where limited domain
requirements can easily be identified, either based on an application
scenario or on a technical imperative. It is, of course, not a complete
list, and it is presented in an arbitrary order, loosely from smaller to
bigger.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

1.  [A home network. It will be mainly unmanaged, constructed by a
    non-specialist. It must work with devices \"out of the box\" as
    shipped by their manufacturers and must create adequate security by
    default. Remote access may be required. The requirements and
    applicable principles are summarized in
    \[[RFC7368](#RFC7368){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.1}
2.  [A small office network. This is sometimes very similar to a home
    network, if whoever is in charge has little or no specialist
    knowledge, but may have differing security and privacy requirements.
    In other cases, it may be professionally constructed using
    recommended products and configurations but operate unmanaged.
    Remote access may be
    required.[¶](#section-3-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.2}
3.  [A vehicle network. This will be designed by the vehicle
    manufacturer but may include devices added by the vehicle\'s owner
    or operator. Parts of the network will have demanding performance
    and reliability requirements with implications for human safety.
    Remote access may be required to certain functions but absolutely
    forbidden for others. Communication with other vehicles, roadside
    infrastructure, and external data sources will be required. See
    \[[IPWAVE-NETWORKING](#I-D.ietf-ipwave-vehicular-networking){.xref}\]
    for a survey of use
    cases.[¶](#section-3-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.3}
4.  [Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) networks and other
    hard real-time networks. These will exhibit specific technical
    requirements, including tough real-time performance targets. See,
    for example, \[[RFC8578](#RFC8578){.xref}\] for numerous use cases.
    An example is a building services network. This will be designed
    specifically for a particular building but using standard
    components. Additional devices may need to be added at any time.
    Parts of the network may have demanding reliability requirements
    with implications for human safety. Remote access may be required to
    certain functions but absolutely forbidden for others. An extreme
    example is a network used for virtual reality or augmented reality
    applications where the latency requirements are very
    stringent.[¶](#section-3-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.4}
5.  [Sensor networks. The two preceding cases will all include sensors,
    but some networks may be specifically limited to sensors and the
    collection and processing of sensor data. They may be in remote or
    technically challenging locations and installed by
    non-specialists.[¶](#section-3-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.5}
6.  [Internet-of-Things (IoT) networks. While this term is very flexible
    and covers many innovative types of networks, including ad hoc
    networks that are formed spontaneously and some applications of 5G
    technology, it seems reasonable to expect that IoT edge networks
    will have special requirements and protocols that are useful only
    within a specific domain, and that these protocols cannot, and for
    security reasons should not, run over the Internet as a
    whole.[¶](#section-3-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.6}
7.  [Constrained Networks. An important subclass of IoT networks
    consists of constrained networks \[[RFC7228](#RFC7228){.xref}\] in
    which the nodes are limited in power consumption and communications
    bandwidth and are therefore limited to using very frugal
    protocols.[¶](#section-3-2.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.7}
8.  [Delay-tolerant networks. These may consist of domains that are
    relatively isolated and constrained in power (e.g., deep space
    networks) and are connected only intermittently to the outside, with
    a very long latency on such connections
    \[[RFC4838](#RFC4838){.xref}\]. Clearly, the protocol requirements
    and possibilities are very specialized in such
    networks.[¶](#section-3-2.8){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.8}
9.  [\"Traditional\" enterprise and campus networks, which may be spread
    over many kilometers and over multiple separate sites, with multiple
    connections to the Internet. Interestingly, the IETF appears never
    to have analyzed this long-established class of networks in a
    general way, except in connection with IPv6 deployment (e.g.,
    \[[RFC7381](#RFC7381){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-3-2.9){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.9}
10. [Unsuitable standards. A situation that can arise in an enterprise
    network is that the Internet-wide solution for a particular
    requirement may either fail locally or be much more complicated than
    is necessary. An example is that the complexity induced by a
    mechanism such as Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE)
    \[[RFC8445](#RFC8445){.xref}\] is not justified within such a
    network. Furthermore, ICE cannot be used in some cases because
    candidate addresses are not known before a call is established, so a
    different local solution is essential
    \[[RFC6947](#RFC6947){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-2.10){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.10}
11. [Managed wide-area networks run by service providers for enterprise
    services such as Layer 2 (Ethernet, etc.) point-to-point
    pseudowires, multipoint Layer 2 Ethernet VPNs using Virtual Private
    LAN Service (VPLS) or Ethernet VPN (EVPN), and Layer 3 IP VPNs.
    These are generally characterized by service-level agreements for
    availability, packet loss, and possibly multicast service. These are
    different from the previous case in that they mostly run over MPLS
    infrastructures, and the requirements for these services are well
    defined by the IETF.[¶](#section-3-2.11){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.11}
12. [Data centers and hosting centers, or distributed services acting as
    such centers. These will have high performance, security, and
    privacy requirements and will typically include large numbers of
    independent \"tenant\" networks overlaid on shared
    infrastructure.[¶](#section-3-2.12){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.12}
13. [Content Delivery Networks (CDNs), comprising distributed data
    centers and the paths between them, spanning thousands of
    kilometers, with numerous connections to the
    Internet.[¶](#section-3-2.13){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.13}
14. [Massive Web Service Provider Networks. This is a small class of
    networks with well-known trademarked names, combining aspects of
    distributed enterprise networks, data centers, and CDNs. They have
    their own international networks bypassing the generic carriers.
    Like CDNs, they have numerous connections to the Internet, typically
    offering a tailored service in each
    economy.[¶](#section-3-2.14){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.14}

Three other aspects, while not tied to specific network types, also
strongly depend on the concept of limited
domains:[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

1.  [Many of the above types of networks may be extended throughout the
    Internet by a variety of virtual private network (VPN) techniques.
    Therefore, we argue that limited domains may overlap each other in
    an arbitrary fashion by use of virtualization techniques. As noted
    above in the discussion of controlled environments, specific
    tunneling and encapsulation techniques may be tailored for use
    within a given domain.[¶](#section-3-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-4.1}
2.  [Intent-Based Networking. In this concept, a network domain is
    configured and managed in accordance with an abstract policy known
    as \"Intent\" to ensure that the network performs as required
    \[[IBN-CONCEPTS](#I-D.irtf-nmrg-ibn-concepts-definitions){.xref}\].
    Whatever technologies are used to support this will be applied
    within the domain boundary, even if the services supported in the
    domain are globally
    accessible.[¶](#section-3-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-4.2}
3.  [Network Slicing. A network slice is a form of virtual network that
    consists of a managed set of resources carved off from a larger
    network \[[ENHANCED-VPN](#I-D.ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn){.xref}\]. This
    is expected to be significant in 5G deployments
    \[[USER-PLANE-PROTOCOL](#I-D.ietf-dmm-5g-uplane-analysis){.xref}\].
    Whatever technologies are used to support slicing will require a
    clear definition of the boundary of a given slice within a larger
    domain.[¶](#section-3-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-4.3}

While it is clearly desirable to use common solutions, and therefore
common standards, wherever possible, it is increasingly difficult to do
so while satisfying the widely varying requirements outlined above.
However, there is a tendency when new protocols and protocol extensions
are proposed to always ask the question \"How will this work across the
open Internet?\" This document suggests that this is not always the best
question. There are protocols and extensions that are not intended to
work across the open Internet. On the contrary, their requirements and
semantics are specifically limited (in the sense defined
above).[¶](#section-3-5){.pilcrow}

A common argument is that if a protocol is intended for limited use, the
chances are very high that it will in fact be used (or misused) in other
scenarios including the so-called open Internet. This is undoubtedly
true and means that limited use is not an excuse for bad design or poor
security. In fact, a limited use requirement potentially adds complexity
to both the protocol and its security design, as discussed
later.[¶](#section-3-6){.pilcrow}

Nevertheless, because of the diversity of limited domains with specific
requirements that is now emerging, specific standards (and ad hoc
standards) will probably emerge for different types of domains. There
will be attempts to capture each market sector, but the market will
demand standardized solutions within each sector. In addition,
operational choices will be made that can in fact only work within a
limited domain. The history of RSVP \[[RFC2205](#RFC2205){.xref}\]
illustrates that a standard defined as if it could work over the open
Internet might not in fact do so. In general, we can no longer assume
that a protocol designed according to classical Internet guidelines will
in fact work reliably across the network as a whole. However, the \"open
Internet\" must remain as the universal method of interconnection.
Reconciling these two aspects is a major
challenge.[¶](#section-3-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#example-sol}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Examples of Limited Domain Solutions](#name-examples-of-limited-domain-s){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-examples-of-limited-domain-s}

This section lists various examples of specific limited domain solutions
that have been proposed or defined. It intentionally does not include
Layer 2 technology solutions, which by definition apply to limited
domains. It is worth noting, however, that with recent developments such
as Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links (TRILL)
\[[RFC6325](#RFC6325){.xref}\] or Shortest Path Bridging
\[[SPB](#SPB){.xref}\], Layer 2 domains may become very
large.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

1.  [Differentiated Services. This mechanism
    \[[RFC2474](#RFC2474){.xref}\] allows a network to assign locally
    significant values to the 6-bit Differentiated Services Code Point
    field in any IP packet. Although there are some recommended code
    point values for specific per-hop queue management behaviors, these
    are specifically intended to be domain-specific code points with
    traffic being classified, conditioned, and mapped or re-marked at
    domain boundaries (unless there is an inter-domain agreement that
    makes mapping or re-marking
    unnecessary).[¶](#section-4-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.1}

2.  [Integrated Services. Although it is not intrinsic in the design of
    RSVP \[[RFC2205](#RFC2205){.xref}\], it is clear from many years\'
    experience that Integrated Services can only be deployed
    successfully within a limited domain that is configured with
    adequate equipment and
    resources.[¶](#section-4-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.2}

3.  [Network function virtualization. As described in
    \[[RFC8568](#RFC8568){.xref}\], this general concept is an open
    research topic in which virtual network functions are orchestrated
    as part of a distributed system. Inevitably, such orchestration
    applies to an administrative domain of some kind, even though
    cross-domain orchestration is also a research
    area.[¶](#section-4-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.3}

4.  [Service Function Chaining (SFC). This technique
    \[[RFC7665](#RFC7665){.xref}\] assumes that services within a
    network are constructed as sequences of individual service functions
    within a specific SFC-enabled domain such as a 5G domain. As that
    RFC states: \"Specific features may need to be enforced at the
    boundaries of an SFC-enabled domain, for example to avoid leaking
    SFC information\". A Network Service Header (NSH)
    \[[RFC8300](#RFC8300){.xref}\] is used to encapsulate packets
    flowing through the service function chain: \"The intended scope of
    the NSH is for use within a single provider\'s operational
    domain.\"[¶](#section-4-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.4}

5.  ::: {#section-4-2.5}
    ::: {#fast}
    Firewall and Service Tickets (FAST). Such tickets would accompany a
    packet to claim the right to traverse a network or request a
    specific network service \[[FAST](#I-D.herbert-fast){.xref}\]. They
    would only be meaningful within a particular
    domain.[¶](#fast){.pilcrow}
    :::
    :::

6.  [Data Center Network Virtualization Overlays. A common requirement
    in data centers that host many tenants (clients) is to provide each
    one with a secure private network, all running over the same
    physical infrastructure. \[[RFC8151](#RFC8151){.xref}\] describes
    various use cases for this, and specifications are under
    development. These include use cases in which the tenant network is
    physically split over several data centers, but which must appear to
    the user as a single secure
    domain.[¶](#section-4-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.6}

7.  [Segment Routing. This is a technique that \"steers a packet through
    an ordered list of instructions, called segments\"
    \[[RFC8402](#RFC8402){.xref}\]. The semantics of these instructions
    are explicitly local to a segment routing domain or even to a single
    node. Technically, these segments or instructions are represented as
    an MPLS label or an IPv6 address, which clearly adds a semantic
    interpretation to them within the
    domain.[¶](#section-4-2.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.7}

8.  [Autonomic Networking. As explained in
    \[[REF-MODEL](#I-D.ietf-anima-reference-model){.xref}\], an
    autonomic network is also a security domain within which an
    autonomic control plane
    \[[ACP](#I-D.ietf-anima-autonomic-control-plane){.xref}\] is used by
    autonomic service agents. These agents manage technical objectives,
    which may be locally defined, subject to domain-wide policy. Thus,
    the domain boundary is important for both security and protocol
    purposes.[¶](#section-4-2.8){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.8}

9.  [Homenet. As shown in \[[RFC7368](#RFC7368){.xref}\], a home
    networking domain has specific protocol needs that differ from those
    in an enterprise network or the Internet as a whole. These include
    the Home Network Control Protocol (HNCP)
    \[[RFC7788](#RFC7788){.xref}\] and a naming and discovery solution
    \[[HOMENET-NAMING](#I-D.ietf-homenet-simple-naming){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4-2.9){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.9}

10. ::: {#section-4-2.10}
    Creative uses of IPv6 features. As IPv6 enters more general use,
    engineers notice that it has much more flexibility than IPv4.
    Innovative suggestions have been made
    for:[¶](#section-4-2.10.1){.pilcrow}

    -   [The flow label, e.g.,
        \[[RFC6294](#RFC6294){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4-2.10.2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.10.2.1}
    -   [Extension headers, e.g., for segment routing
        \[[RFC8754](#RFC8754){.xref}\] or Operations, Administration,
        and Maintenance (OAM) marking
        \[[IPV6-ALT-MARK](#I-D.ietf-6man-ipv6-alt-mark){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4-2.10.2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.10.2.2}
    -   [Meaningful address bits, e.g.,
        \[[EMBEDDED-SEMANTICS](#I-D.jiang-semantic-prefix){.xref}\].
        Also, segment routing uses IPv6 addresses as segment identifiers
        with specific local meanings
        \[[RFC8402](#RFC8402){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4-2.10.2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.10.2.3}
    -   [If segment routing is used for network programming
        \[[SRV6-NETWORK](#I-D.ietf-spring-srv6-network-programming){.xref}\],
        IPv6 extension headers can support rather complex local
        functionality.[¶](#section-4-2.10.2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.10.2.4}

    The case of the extension header is particularly interesting, since
    its existence has been a major \"selling point\" for IPv6, but new
    extension headers are notorious for being virtually impossible to
    deploy across the whole Internet \[[RFC7045](#RFC7045){.xref}\]
    \[[RFC7872](#RFC7872){.xref}\]. It is worth noting that extension
    header filtering is considered an important security issue
    \[[IPV6-EXT-HEADERS](#I-D.ietf-opsec-ipv6-eh-filtering){.xref}\].
    There is considerable appetite among vendors or operators to have
    flexibility in defining extension headers for use in limited or
    specialized domains, e.g.,
    \[[IPV6-SRH](#I-D.voyer-6man-extension-header-insertion){.xref}\],
    \[[BIGIP](#BIGIP){.xref}\], and
    \[[APP-AWARE](#I-D.li-6man-app-aware-ipv6-network){.xref}\]. Locally
    significant hop-by-hop options are also envisaged, that would be
    understood by routers inside a domain but not elsewhere, e.g.,
    \[[IN-SITU-OAM](#I-D.ietf-ippm-ioam-ipv6-options){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4-2.10.3){.pilcrow}
    :::

11. [Deterministic Networking (DetNet). The Deterministic Networking
    Architecture \[[RFC8655](#RFC8655){.xref}\] and encapsulation
    \[[DETNET-DATA-PLANE](#I-D.ietf-detnet-data-plane-framework){.xref}\]
    aim to support flows with extremely low data loss rates and bounded
    latency but only within a part of the network that is \"DetNet
    aware\". Thus, as for Differentiated Services above, the concept of
    a domain is
    fundamental.[¶](#section-4-2.11){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.11}

12. [Provisioning Domains (PvDs). An architecture for Multiple
    Provisioning Domains has been defined \[[RFC7556](#RFC7556){.xref}\]
    to allow hosts attached to multiple networks to learn explicit
    details about the services provided by each of those
    networks.[¶](#section-4-2.12){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.12}

13. [Address Scopes. For completeness, we mention that, particularly in
    IPv6, some addresses have explicitly limited scope. In particular,
    link-local addresses are limited to a single physical link
    \[[RFC4291](#RFC4291){.xref}\], and Unique Local Addresses
    \[[RFC4193](#RFC4193){.xref}\] are limited to a somewhat loosely
    defined local site scope. Previously, site-local addresses were
    defined, but they were obsoleted precisely because of \"the fuzzy
    nature of the site concept\" \[[RFC3879](#RFC3879){.xref}\].
    Multicast addresses also have explicit scoping
    \[[RFC4291](#RFC4291){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4-2.13){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.13}

14. [As an application-layer example, consider streaming services such
    as IPTV infrastructures that rely on standard protocols, but for
    which access is not globally
    available.[¶](#section-4-2.14){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.14}

All of these suggestions are only viable within a specified domain.
Nevertheless, all of them are clearly intended for multivendor
implementation on thousands or millions of network domains, so
interoperable standardization would be beneficial. This argument might
seem irrelevant to private or proprietary implementations, but these
have a strong tendency to become de facto standards if they succeed, so
the arguments of this document still apply.[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#scope}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [The Scope of Protocols in Limited Domains](#name-the-scope-of-protocols-in-l){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-the-scope-of-protocols-in-l}

One consequence of the deployment of limited domains in the Internet is
that some protocols will be designed, extended, or configured so that
they only work correctly between end systems in such domains. This is to
some extent encouraged by some existing standards and by the assignment
of code points for local or experimental use. In any case, it cannot be
prevented. Also, by endorsing efforts such as Service Function Chaining,
Segment Routing, and Deterministic Networking, the IETF is in effect
encouraging such deployments. Furthermore, it seems inevitable, if the
Internet of Things becomes reality, that millions of edge networks
containing completely novel types of nodes will be connected to the
Internet; each one of these edge networks will be a limited
domain.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

It is therefore appropriate to discuss whether protocols or protocol
extensions should sometimes be standardized to interoperate only within
a limited-domain boundary. Such protocols would not be required to
interoperate across the Internet as a whole. Various scenarios could
then arise if there are multiple domains using the limited-domain
protocol in question:[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}

A.  ::: {#section-5-3.1}
    If a domain is split into two parts connected over the Internet
    directly at the IP layer (i.e., with no tunnel encapsulating the
    packets), a limited-domain protocol could be operated between those
    two parts regardless of its special nature, as long as it respects
    standard IP formats and is not arbitrarily blocked by firewalls. A
    simple example is any protocol using a port number assigned to a
    specific non-IETF protocol.[¶](#section-5-3.1.1){.pilcrow}

    Such a protocol could reasonably be described as an \"inter-domain\"
    protocol because the Internet is transparent to it, even if it is
    meaningless except in the two limited domains. This is, of course,
    nothing new in the Internet
    architecture.[¶](#section-5-3.1.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

B.  ::: {#section-5-3.2}
    If a limited-domain protocol does not respect standard IP formats
    (for example, if it includes a non-standard IPv6 extension header),
    it could not be operated between two domains connected over the
    Internet directly at the IP layer.[¶](#section-5-3.2.1){.pilcrow}

    Such a protocol could reasonably be described as an \"intra-domain\"
    protocol, and the Internet is opaque to
    it.[¶](#section-5-3.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

C.  ::: {#section-5-3.3}
    If a limited-domain protocol is clearly specified to be invalid
    outside its domain of origin, neither scenario A nor B applies. The
    only solution would be a single virtual domain. For example, an
    encapsulating tunnel between two domains could be used to create the
    virtual domain. Also, nodes at the domain boundary must drop all
    packets using the limited-domain
    protocol.[¶](#section-5-3.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

D.  ::: {#section-5-3.4}
    If a limited-domain protocol has domain-specific variants, such that
    implementations in different domains could not interoperate if those
    domains were unified by some mechanism as in scenario C, the
    protocol is not interoperable in the normal sense. If two domains
    using it were merged, the protocol might fail unpredictably. A
    simple example is any protocol using a port number assigned for
    experimental use. Related issues are discussed in
    \[[RFC5704](#RFC5704){.xref}\], including the complex example of
    Transport MPLS.[¶](#section-5-3.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

To provide a widespread example, consider Differentiated Services
\[[RFC2474](#RFC2474){.xref}\]. A packet containing any value whatsoever
in the 6 bits of the Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) is well
formed and falls into scenario A. However, because the semantics of DSCP
values are locally significant, the packet also falls into scenario D.
In fact, Differentiated Services are only interoperable across domain
boundaries if there is a corresponding agreement between the operators;
otherwise, a specific gateway function is required for meaningful
interoperability. Much more detailed discussion is found in
\[[RFC2474](#RFC2474){.xref}\] and
\[[RFC8100](#RFC8100){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-4){.pilcrow}

To provide a provocative example, consider the proposal in
\[[IPV6-SRH](#I-D.voyer-6man-extension-header-insertion){.xref}\] that
the restrictions in \[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\] should be relaxed to
allow IPv6 extension headers to be inserted on the fly in IPv6 packets.
If this is done in such a way that the affected packets can never leave
the specific limited domain in which they were modified, scenario C
applies. If the semantic content of the inserted headers is locally
defined, scenario D also applies. In neither case is the Internet
outside the limited domain disturbed. However, inside the domain, nodes
must understand the variant protocol. Unless it is standardized as a
formal version, with all the complexity that implies
\[[RFC6709](#RFC6709){.xref}\], the nodes must all be non-standard to
the extent of understanding the variant protocol. For the example of
IPv6 header insertion, that means non-compliance with
\[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\] within the domain, even if the inserted
headers are themselves fully compliant. Apart from the issue of formal
compliance, such deviations from documented standard behavior might lead
to significant debugging issues. The possible practical impact of the
header insertion example is explored in
\[[IN-FLIGHT-IPV6](#I-D.smith-6man-in-flight-eh-insertion-harmful){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-5){.pilcrow}

The FAST proposal mentioned in [Section 4, Paragraph 2, Item
5](#fast){.xref} is also an interesting case study. The semantics of
FAST tickets \[[FAST](#I-D.herbert-fast){.xref}\] have limited scope.
However, they are designed in a way that, in principle, allows them to
traverse the open Internet, as standardized IPv6 hop-by-hop options or
even as a proposed form of IPv4 extension header
\[[IPV4-EXT-HEADERS](#I-D.herbert-ipv4-eh){.xref}\]. Whether such
options can be used reliably across the open Internet remains unclear
\[[IPV6-EXT-HEADERS](#I-D.ietf-opsec-ipv6-eh-filtering){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-6){.pilcrow}

We conclude that it is reasonable to explicitly define limited-domain
protocols, either as standards or as proprietary mechanisms, as long as
they describe which of the above scenarios apply and they clarify how
the domain is defined. As long as all relevant standards are respected
outside the domain boundary, a well-specified limited-domain protocol
need not damage the rest of the Internet. However, as described in the
next section, mechanisms are needed to support domain membership
operations.[¶](#section-5-7){.pilcrow}

Note that this conclusion is not a recommendation to abandon the normal
goal that a standardized protocol should be global in scope and able to
interoperate across the open Internet. It is simply a recognition that
this will not always be the case.[¶](#section-5-8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#func}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Functional Requirements of Limited Domains](#name-functional-requirements-of-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-functional-requirements-of-}

Noting that limited-domain protocols have been defined in the past, and
that others will undoubtedly be defined in the future, it is useful to
consider how a protocol can be made aware of the domain within which it
operates and how the domain boundary nodes can be identified. As the
taxonomy in [Appendix A](#taxo){.xref} shows, there are numerous aspects
to a domain. However, we can identify some generally required features
and functions that would apply partially or completely to many
cases.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

Today, where limited domains exist, they are essentially created by
careful configuration of boundary routers and firewalls. If a domain is
characterized by one or more address prefixes, address assignment to
hosts must also be carefully managed. This is an error-prone method, and
a combination of configuration errors and default routing can lead to
unwanted traffic escaping the domain. Our basic assumption is therefore
that it should be possible for domains to be created and managed
automatically, with minimal human configuration. We now discuss
requirements for automating domain creation and
management.[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

First, if we drew a topology map, any given domain \-- virtual or
physical \-- will have a well-defined boundary between \"inside\" and
\"outside\". However, that boundary in itself has no technical meaning.
What matters in reality is whether a node is a member of the domain and
whether it is at the boundary between the domain and the rest of the
Internet. Thus, the boundary in itself does not need to be identified,
but boundary nodes face both inwards and outwards. Inside the domain, a
sending node needs to know whether it is sending to an inside or outside
destination, and a receiving node needs to know whether a packet
originated inside or outside. Also, a boundary node needs to know which
of its interfaces are inward facing or outward facing. It is irrelevant
whether the interfaces involved are physical or
virtual.[¶](#section-6-3){.pilcrow}

To underline that domain boundaries need to be identifiable, consider
the statement from the Deterministic Networking Problem Statement
\[[RFC8557](#RFC8557){.xref}\] that \"there is still a lack of clarity
regarding the limits of a domain where a deterministic path can be set
up\". This remark can certainly be
generalized.[¶](#section-6-4){.pilcrow}

With this perspective, we can list some general functional requirements.
An underlying assumption here is that domain membership operations
should be cryptographically secured; a domain without such security
cannot be reliably protected from attack.[¶](#section-6-5){.pilcrow}

1.  [Domain Identity. A domain must have a unique and verifiable
    identifier; effectively, this should be a public key for the domain.
    Without this, there is no way to secure domain operations and domain
    membership. The holder of the corresponding private key becomes the
    trust anchor for the
    domain.[¶](#section-6-6.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.1}
2.  [Nesting. It must be possible for domains to be nested (see, for
    example, the network-slicing example mentioned
    above).[¶](#section-6-6.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.2}
3.  [Overlapping. It must be possible for nodes and links to be in more
    than one domain (see, for example, the case of PvDs mentioned
    above).[¶](#section-6-6.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.3}
4.  [Node Eligibility. It must be possible for a node to determine which
    domain(s) it can potentially join and on which
    interface(s).[¶](#section-6-6.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.4}
5.  [Secure Enrollment. A node must be able to enroll in a given domain
    via secure node identification and to acquire relevant security
    credentials (authorization) for operations within the domain. If a
    node has multiple physical or virtual interfaces, individual
    enrollment for each interface may be
    required.[¶](#section-6-6.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.5}
6.  [Withdrawal. A node must be able to cancel enrollment in a given
    domain.[¶](#section-6-6.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.6}
7.  [Dynamic Membership. Optionally, a node should be able to
    temporarily leave or rejoin a domain (i.e., enrollment is persistent
    but membership is
    intermittent).[¶](#section-6-6.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.7}
8.  [Role, implying authorization to perform a certain set of actions. A
    node must have a verifiable role. In the simplest case, the role
    choices are \"interior node\" and \"boundary node\". In a boundary
    node, individual interfaces may have different roles, e.g., \"inward
    facing\" and \"outward
    facing\".[¶](#section-6-6.8){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.8}
9.  [Peer Verification. A node must be able to verify whether another
    node is a member of the
    domain.[¶](#section-6-6.9){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.9}
10. [Role Verification. A node should be able to learn the verified role
    of another node. In particular, it should be possible for a node to
    find boundary nodes (interfacing to the
    Internet).[¶](#section-6-6.10){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.10}
11. [Domain Data. In a domain with management requirements, it must be
    possible for a node to acquire domain policy and/or domain
    configuration data. This would include, for example, filtering
    policy to ensure that inappropriate packets do not leave the
    domain.[¶](#section-6-6.11){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-6.11}

These requirements could form the basis for further analysis and
solution design.[¶](#section-6-7){.pilcrow}

Another aspect is whether individual packets within a limited domain
need to carry any sort of indicator that they belong to that domain or
whether this information will be implicit in the IP addresses of the
packet. A related question is whether individual packets need
cryptographic authentication. This topic is for further
study.[¶](#section-6-8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#security}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

As noted above, a protocol intended for limited use may well be
inadvertently used on the open Internet, so limited use is not an excuse
for poor security. In fact, a limited use requirement potentially adds
complexity to the security design.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

Often, the boundary of a limited domain will also act as a security
boundary. In particular, it will serve as a trust boundary and as a
boundary of authority for defining capabilities. For example, segment
routing \[[RFC8402](#RFC8402){.xref}\] explicitly uses the concept of a
\"trusted domain\" in this way. Within the boundary, limited-domain
protocols or protocol features will be useful, but they will in many
cases be meaningless or harmful if they enter or leave the
domain.[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}

The boundary also serves to provide confidentiality and privacy for
operational parameters that the operator does not wish to reveal. Note
that this is distinct from privacy protection for individual users
within the domain.[¶](#section-7-3){.pilcrow}

The security model for a limited-scope protocol must allow for the
boundary and in particular for a trust model that changes at the
boundary. Typically, credentials will need to be signed by a
domain-specific authority.[¶](#section-7-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#iana}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[ACP\]
:   [Eckert, T.]{.refAuthor}[, Behringer, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Bjarnason]{.refAuthor}, [\"An Autonomic Control Plane
    (ACP)\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-anima-autonomic-control-plane-27]{.seriesInfo}, 2 July
    2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-anima-autonomic-control-plane-27>\>.
:   

\[APP-AWARE\]
:   [Li, Z.]{.refAuthor}[, Peng, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Li, C.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Xie, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Voyer, D.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Li, X.]{.refAuthor}[, Liu, P.]{.refAuthor}[, Liu, C.]{.refAuthor}[,
    and K. Ebisawa]{.refAuthor}, [\"Application-aware IPv6 Networking
    (APN6) Encapsulation\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-li-6man-app-aware-ipv6-network-02]{.seriesInfo}, 2 July 2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-li-6man-app-aware-ipv6-network-02>\>.
:   

\[BIGIP\]
:   [Li, R.]{.refAuthor}, [\"HUAWEI - Big IP Initiative\"]{.refTitle},
    2018, \<<https://www.iaria.org/announcements/HuaweiBigIP.pdf>\>.
:   

\[DETNET-DATA-PLANE\]
:   [Varga, B.]{.refAuthor}[, Farkas, J.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Berger, L.]{.refAuthor}[, Malis, A.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Bryant]{.refAuthor}, [\"DetNet Data Plane Framework\"]{.refTitle},
    [Work in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-detnet-data-plane-framework-06]{.seriesInfo}, 6 May 2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-detnet-data-plane-framework-06>\>.
:   

\[DNS-PERIMETER\]
:   [Crocker, D.]{.refAuthor}[ and T. Adams]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS
    Perimeter Overlay\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-dcrocker-dns-perimeter-01]{.seriesInfo}, 11
    June 2019,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-dcrocker-dns-perimeter-01>\>.
:   

\[EMBEDDED-SEMANTICS\]
:   [Jiang, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Qiong, Q.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Farrer, I.]{.refAuthor}[, Bo, Y.]{.refAuthor}[, and T.
    Yang]{.refAuthor}, [\"Analysis of Semantic Embedded IPv6 Address
    Schemas\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-jiang-semantic-prefix-06]{.seriesInfo}, 15
    July 2013,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-jiang-semantic-prefix-06>\>.
:   

\[ENHANCED-VPN\]
:   [Dong, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Bryant, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Li, Z.]{.refAuthor}[, Miyasaka, T.]{.refAuthor}[, and Y.
    Lee]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Framework for Enhanced Virtual Private
    Networks (VPN+) Service\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn-06]{.seriesInfo}, 13 July 2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn-06>\>.
:   

\[FAST\]
:   [Herbert, T.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Firewall and Service
    Tickets\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-herbert-fast-04]{.seriesInfo}, 10 April 2019,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-herbert-fast-04>\>.
:   

\[FRAG-FRAGILE\]
:   [Bonica, R.]{.refAuthor}[, Baker, F.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Huston, G.]{.refAuthor}[, Hinden, R.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Troan, O.]{.refAuthor}[, and F. Gont]{.refAuthor}, [\"IP
    Fragmentation Considered Fragile\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-intarea-frag-fragile-17]{.seriesInfo}, 30 September 2019,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-intarea-frag-fragile-17>\>.
:   

\[HOMENET-NAMING\]
:   [Lemon, T.]{.refAuthor}[, Migault, D.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Cheshire]{.refAuthor}, [\"Homenet Naming and Service Discovery
    Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-homenet-simple-naming-03]{.seriesInfo},
    23 October 2018,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-homenet-simple-naming-03>\>.
:   

\[IBN-CONCEPTS\]
:   [Clemm, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Ciavaglia, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Granville, L.]{.refAuthor}[, and J. Tantsura]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Intent-Based Networking - Concepts and Definitions\"]{.refTitle},
    [Work in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-irtf-nmrg-ibn-concepts-definitions-01]{.seriesInfo}, 9 March
    2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-irtf-nmrg-ibn-concepts-definitions-01>\>.
:   

\[IN-FLIGHT-IPV6\]
:   [Smith, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Kottapalli, N.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Bonica, R.]{.refAuthor}[, Gont, F.]{.refAuthor}[, and T.
    Herbert]{.refAuthor}, [\"In-Flight IPv6 Extension Header Insertion
    Considered Harmful\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-smith-6man-in-flight-eh-insertion-harmful-02]{.seriesInfo}, 30
    May 2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-smith-6man-in-flight-eh-insertion-harmful-02>\>.
:   

\[IN-SITU-OAM\]
:   [Bhandari, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Brockners, F.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Pignataro, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Gredler, H.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Leddy, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Youell, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Mizrahi, T.]{.refAuthor}[, Kfir, A.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Gafni, B.]{.refAuthor}[, Lapukhov, P.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Spiegel, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Krishnan, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and R.
    Asati]{.refAuthor}, [\"In-situ OAM IPv6 Options\"]{.refTitle}, [Work
    in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-ipv6-options-02]{.seriesInfo}, 13 July 2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-ipv6-options-02>\>.
:   

\[IPV4-EXT-HEADERS\]
:   [Herbert, T.]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv4 Extension Headers and Flow
    Label\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-herbert-ipv4-eh-01]{.seriesInfo}, 2 May 2019,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-herbert-ipv4-eh-01>\>.
:   

\[IPV6-ALT-MARK\]
:   [Fioccola, G.]{.refAuthor}[, Zhou, T.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Cociglio, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Qin, F.]{.refAuthor}[, and R.
    Pang]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6 Application of the Alternate Marking
    Method\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-6man-ipv6-alt-mark-01]{.seriesInfo}, 22
    June 2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-6man-ipv6-alt-mark-01>\>.
:   

\[IPV6-EXT-HEADERS\]
:   [Gont, F.]{.refAuthor}[ and W. LIU]{.refAuthor}, [\"Recommendations
    on the Filtering of IPv6 Packets Containing IPv6 Extension
    Headers\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-opsec-ipv6-eh-filtering-06]{.seriesInfo}, 2 July 2018,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-opsec-ipv6-eh-filtering-06>\>.
:   

\[IPV6-SRH\]
:   [Voyer, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Filsfils, C.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Dukes, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Matsushima, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Leddy, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Li, Z.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Guichard]{.refAuthor}, [\"Deployments With Insertion of IPv6 Segment
    Routing Headers\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-voyer-6man-extension-header-insertion-09]{.seriesInfo}, 19 May
    2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-voyer-6man-extension-header-insertion-09>\>.
:   

\[IPV6-USE-MINMTU\]
:   [Andrews, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"TCP Fails To Respect
    IPV6_USE_MIN_MTU\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-andrews-tcp-and-ipv6-use-minmtu-04]{.seriesInfo}, 18 October
    2015,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-andrews-tcp-and-ipv6-use-minmtu-04>\>.
:   

\[IPWAVE-NETWORKING\]
:   [Jeong, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6 Wireless Access in Vehicular
    Environments (IPWAVE): Problem Statement and Use
    Cases\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-ipwave-vehicular-networking-16]{.seriesInfo}, 7 July
    2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-ipwave-vehicular-networking-16>\>.
:   

\[REF-MODEL\]
:   [Behringer, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Carpenter, B.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Eckert, T.]{.refAuthor}[, Ciavaglia, L.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Nobre]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Reference Model for Autonomic
    Networking\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-anima-reference-model-10]{.seriesInfo},
    22 November 2018,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-anima-reference-model-10>\>.
:   

\[RFC2205\]
:   [Braden, R., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Zhang, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Berson, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Herzog, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Jamin]{.refAuthor}, [\"Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) \--
    Version 1 Functional Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    2205]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2205]{.seriesInfo}, September
    1997, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2205>\>.
:   

\[RFC2474\]
:   [Nichols, K.]{.refAuthor}[, Blake, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Baker, F.]{.refAuthor}[, and D. Black]{.refAuthor}, [\"Definition of
    the Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6
    Headers\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2474]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2474]{.seriesInfo}, December 1998,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2474>\>.
:   

\[RFC2775\]
:   [Carpenter, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet Transparency\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 2775]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2775]{.seriesInfo},
    February 2000, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2775>\>.
:   

\[RFC2923\]
:   [Lahey, K.]{.refAuthor}, [\"TCP Problems with Path MTU
    Discovery\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2923]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2923]{.seriesInfo}, September 2000,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2923>\>.
:   

\[RFC3234\]
:   [Carpenter, B.]{.refAuthor}[ and S. Brim]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Middleboxes: Taxonomy and Issues\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    3234]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC3234]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2002, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3234>\>.
:   

\[RFC3879\]
:   [Huitema, C.]{.refAuthor}[ and B. Carpenter]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Deprecating Site Local Addresses\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    3879]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC3879]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2004, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3879>\>.
:   

\[RFC4193\]
:   [Hinden, R.]{.refAuthor}[ and B. Haberman]{.refAuthor}, [\"Unique
    Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4193]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC4193]{.seriesInfo}, October 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4193>\>.
:   

\[RFC4291\]
:   [Hinden, R.]{.refAuthor}[ and S. Deering]{.refAuthor}, [\"IP Version
    6 Addressing Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4291]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC4291]{.seriesInfo}, February 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4291>\>.
:   

\[RFC4397\]
:   [Bryskin, I.]{.refAuthor}[ and A. Farrel]{.refAuthor}, [\"A
    Lexicography for the Interpretation of Generalized Multiprotocol
    Label Switching (GMPLS) Terminology within the Context of the
    ITU-T\'s Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON)
    Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4397]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4397]{.seriesInfo}, February 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4397>\>.
:   

\[RFC4427\]
:   [Mannie, E., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and D. Papadimitriou,
    Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Recovery (Protection and Restoration)
    Terminology for Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
    (GMPLS)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4427]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4427]{.seriesInfo}, March 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4427>\>.
:   

\[RFC4655\]
:   [Farrel, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Vasseur, J.-P.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Ash]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Path Computation Element (PCE)-Based
    Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4655]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4655]{.seriesInfo}, August 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4655>\>.
:   

\[RFC4821\]
:   [Mathis, M.]{.refAuthor}[ and J. Heffner]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Packetization Layer Path MTU Discovery\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4821]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4821]{.seriesInfo}, March 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4821>\>.
:   

\[RFC4838\]
:   [Cerf, V.]{.refAuthor}[, Burleigh, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Hooke, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Torgerson, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Durst, R.]{.refAuthor}[, Scott, K.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Fall, K.]{.refAuthor}[, and H. Weiss]{.refAuthor}, [\"Delay-Tolerant
    Networking Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4838]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4838]{.seriesInfo}, April 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4838>\>.
:   

\[RFC4924\]
:   [Aboba, B., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and E. Davies]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Reflections on Internet Transparency\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4924]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4924]{.seriesInfo}, July 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4924>\>.
:   

\[RFC5704\]
:   [Bryant, S., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Morrow, M., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, and
    IAB]{.refAuthor}, [\"Uncoordinated Protocol Development Considered
    Harmful\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5704]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5704]{.seriesInfo}, November 2009,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5704>\>.
:   

\[RFC6294\]
:   [Hu, Q.]{.refAuthor}[ and B. Carpenter]{.refAuthor}, [\"Survey of
    Proposed Use Cases for the IPv6 Flow Label\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6294]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6294]{.seriesInfo}, June 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6294>\>.
:   

\[RFC6325\]
:   [Perlman, R.]{.refAuthor}[, Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Dutt, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Gai, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and A.
    Ghanwani]{.refAuthor}, [\"Routing Bridges (RBridges): Base Protocol
    Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6325]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6325]{.seriesInfo}, July 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6325>\>.
:   

\[RFC6398\]
:   [Le Faucheur, F., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"IP Router Alert
    Considerations and Usage\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 168]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    6398]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6398]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2011, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6398>\>.
:   

\[RFC6407\]
:   [Weis, B.]{.refAuthor}[, Rowles, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and T.
    Hardjono]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Group Domain of
    Interpretation\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6407]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6407]{.seriesInfo}, October 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6407>\>.
:   

\[RFC6709\]
:   [Carpenter, B.]{.refAuthor}[, Aboba, B., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Cheshire]{.refAuthor}, [\"Design Considerations for Protocol
    Extensions\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6709]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6709]{.seriesInfo}, September 2012,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6709>\>.
:   

\[RFC6947\]
:   [Boucadair, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Kaplan, H.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Gilman, R.]{.refAuthor}[, and S. Veikkolainen]{.refAuthor}, [\"The
    Session Description Protocol (SDP) Alternate Connectivity (ALTC)
    Attribute\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6947]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6947]{.seriesInfo}, May 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6947>\>.
:   

\[RFC6950\]
:   [Peterson, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Kolkman, O.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Tschofenig, H.]{.refAuthor}[, and B. Aboba]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Architectural Considerations on Application Features in the
    DNS\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6950]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6950]{.seriesInfo}, October 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6950>\>.
:   

\[RFC7045\]
:   [Carpenter, B.]{.refAuthor}[ and S. Jiang]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Transmission and Processing of IPv6 Extension
    Headers\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7045]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7045]{.seriesInfo}, December 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7045>\>.
:   

\[RFC7228\]
:   [Bormann, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Ersue, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and A.
    Keranen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Terminology for Constrained-Node
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7228]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7228]{.seriesInfo}, May 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7228>\>.
:   

\[RFC7368\]
:   [Chown, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Arkko, J.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Brandt, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Troan, O.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Weil]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6 Home Networking Architecture
    Principles\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7368]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7368]{.seriesInfo}, October 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7368>\>.
:   

\[RFC7381\]
:   [Chittimaneni, K.]{.refAuthor}[, Chown, T.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Howard, L.]{.refAuthor}[, Kuarsingh, V.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Pouffary, Y.]{.refAuthor}[, and E. Vyncke]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Enterprise IPv6 Deployment Guidelines\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7381]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7381]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2014, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7381>\>.
:   

\[RFC7556\]
:   [Anipko, D., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Multiple Provisioning Domain
    Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7556]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7556]{.seriesInfo}, June 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7556>\>.
:   

\[RFC7663\]
:   [Trammell, B., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and M. Kuehlewind,
    Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Report from the IAB Workshop on Stack Evolution
    in a Middlebox Internet (SEMI)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7663]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7663]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2015, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7663>\>.
:   

\[RFC7665\]
:   [Halpern, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and C. Pignataro, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Service Function Chaining (SFC) Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7665]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7665]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2015, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7665>\>.
:   

\[RFC7754\]
:   [Barnes, R.]{.refAuthor}[, Cooper, A.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Kolkman, O.]{.refAuthor}[, Thaler, D.]{.refAuthor}[, and E.
    Nordmark]{.refAuthor}, [\"Technical Considerations for Internet
    Service Blocking and Filtering\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7754]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7754]{.seriesInfo}, March 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7754>\>.
:   

\[RFC7788\]
:   [Stenberg, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Barth, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and P.
    Pfister]{.refAuthor}, [\"Home Networking Control
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7788]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7788]{.seriesInfo}, April 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7788>\>.
:   

\[RFC7872\]
:   [Gont, F.]{.refAuthor}[, Linkova, J.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Chown, T.]{.refAuthor}[, and W. Liu]{.refAuthor}, [\"Observations on
    the Dropping of Packets with IPv6 Extension Headers in the Real
    World\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7872]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7872]{.seriesInfo}, June 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7872>\>.
:   

\[RFC8085\]
:   [Eggert, L.]{.refAuthor}[, Fairhurst, G.]{.refAuthor}[, and G.
    Shepherd]{.refAuthor}, [\"UDP Usage Guidelines\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP
    145]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8085]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8085]{.seriesInfo}, March 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8085>\>.
:   

\[RFC8086\]
:   [Yong, L., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Crabbe, E.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Xu, X.]{.refAuthor}[, and T. Herbert]{.refAuthor}, [\"GRE-in-UDP
    Encapsulation\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8086]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8086]{.seriesInfo}, March 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8086>\>.
:   

\[RFC8100\]
:   [Geib, R., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and D. Black]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Diffserv-Interconnection Classes and Practice\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8100]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8100]{.seriesInfo}, March 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8100>\>.
:   

\[RFC8151\]
:   [Yong, L.]{.refAuthor}[, Dunbar, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Toy, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Isaac, A.]{.refAuthor}[, and V.
    Manral]{.refAuthor}, [\"Use Cases for Data Center Network
    Virtualization Overlay Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8151]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8151]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8151>\>.
:   

\[RFC8200\]
:   [Deering, S.]{.refAuthor}[ and R. Hinden]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet
    Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    86]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8200]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8200]{.seriesInfo}, July 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200>\>.
:   

\[RFC8300\]
:   [Quinn, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Elzur, U., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, and C.
    Pignataro, Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Network Service Header
    (NSH)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8300]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8300]{.seriesInfo}, January 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8300>\>.
:   

\[RFC8402\]
:   [Filsfils, C., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Previdi, S., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Ginsberg, L.]{.refAuthor}[, Decraene, B.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Litkowski, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and R. Shakir]{.refAuthor}, [\"Segment
    Routing Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8402]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8402]{.seriesInfo}, July 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8402>\>.
:   

\[RFC8445\]
:   [Keranen, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Holmberg, C.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Rosenberg]{.refAuthor}, [\"Interactive Connectivity Establishment
    (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
    Traversal\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8445]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8445]{.seriesInfo}, July 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8445>\>.
:   

\[RFC8517\]
:   [Dolson, D., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Snellman, J.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Boucadair, M., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, and C. Jacquenet]{.refAuthor},
    [\"An Inventory of Transport-Centric Functions Provided by
    Middleboxes: An Operator Perspective\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8517]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8517]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2019, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8517>\>.
:   

\[RFC8557\]
:   [Finn, N.]{.refAuthor}[ and P. Thubert]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Deterministic Networking Problem Statement\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8557]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8557]{.seriesInfo}, May 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8557>\>.
:   

\[RFC8568\]
:   [Bernardos, CJ.]{.refAuthor}[, Rahman, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Zuniga,
    JC.]{.refAuthor}[, Contreras, LM.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Aranda, P.]{.refAuthor}[, and P. Lynch]{.refAuthor}, [\"Network
    Virtualization Research Challenges\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8568]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8568]{.seriesInfo}, April 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8568>\>.
:   

\[RFC8578\]
:   [Grossman, E., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Deterministic Networking Use
    Cases\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8578]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8578]{.seriesInfo}, May 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8578>\>.
:   

\[RFC8655\]
:   [Finn, N.]{.refAuthor}[, Thubert, P.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Varga, B.]{.refAuthor}[, and J. Farkas]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Deterministic Networking Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8655]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8655]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2019, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8655>\>.
:   

\[RFC8754\]
:   [Filsfils, C., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Dukes, D., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Previdi, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Leddy, J.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Matsushima, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and D. Voyer]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6
    Segment Routing Header (SRH)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8754]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC8754]{.seriesInfo}, March 2020,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8754>\>.
:   

\[SPB\]
:   [\"IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks - Bridges
    and Bridged Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1109/IEEESTD.2018.8403927]{.seriesInfo}, [IEEE
    802.1Q-2018]{.seriesInfo}, July 2018,
    \<<https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8403927>\>.
:   

\[SRV6-NETWORK\]
:   [Filsfils, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Camarillo, P.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Leddy, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Voyer, D.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Matsushima, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and Z. Li]{.refAuthor}, [\"SRv6
    Network Programming\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-spring-srv6-network-programming-16]{.seriesInfo}, 27 June
    2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-spring-srv6-network-programming-16>\>.
:   

\[USER-PLANE-PROTOCOL\]
:   [Homma, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Miyasaka, T.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Matsushima, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and D. Voyer]{.refAuthor}, [\"User
    Plane Protocol and Architectural Analysis on 3GPP 5G
    System\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-dmm-5g-uplane-analysis-03]{.seriesInfo},
    3 November 2019,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-dmm-5g-uplane-analysis-03>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#taxo}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Appendix A.](#section-appendix.a){.section-number .selfRef} [Taxonomy of Limited Domains](#name-taxonomy-of-limited-domains){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-taxonomy-of-limited-domains}

This appendix develops a taxonomy for describing limited domains.
Several major aspects are considered in this
taxonomy:[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}

-   [The domain as a
    whole[¶](#section-appendix.a-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-2.1}
-   [The individual
    nodes[¶](#section-appendix.a-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-2.2}
-   [The domain
    boundary[¶](#section-appendix.a-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-2.3}
-   [The domain\'s
    topology[¶](#section-appendix.a-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-2.4}
-   [The domain\'s
    technology[¶](#section-appendix.a-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-2.5}
-   [How the domain connects to the
    Internet[¶](#section-appendix.a-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-2.6}
-   [The security, trust, and privacy
    model[¶](#section-appendix.a-2.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-2.7}
-   [Operations[¶](#section-appendix.a-2.8){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-2.8}

The following sub-sections analyze each of these
aspects.[¶](#section-appendix.a-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#tax-whole}
::: {#section-a.1 .section}
## [A.1.](#section-a.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Domain as a Whole](#name-domain-as-a-whole){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-domain-as-a-whole}

-   [Why does the domain exist? (e.g., human choice, administrative
    policy, orchestration requirements, technical requirements such as
    operational partitioning for scaling
    reasons)[¶](#section-a.1-1.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.1-1.1}
-   [If there are special requirements, are they at Layer 2, Layer 3, or
    an upper layer?[¶](#section-a.1-1.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.1-1.2}
-   [Where does the domain lie on the spectrum between completely
    managed by humans and completely
    autonomic?[¶](#section-a.1-1.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.1-1.3}
-   [If managed, what style of management applies? (Manual
    configuration, automated configuration,
    orchestration?)[¶](#section-a.1-1.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.1-1.4}
-   [Is there a policy model? (Intent, configuration
    policies?)[¶](#section-a.1-1.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.1-1.5}
-   [Does the domain provide controlled or paid service or open
    access?[¶](#section-a.1-1.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.1-1.6}
:::
:::

::: {#tax-nodes}
::: {#section-a.2 .section}
## [A.2.](#section-a.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Individual Nodes](#name-individual-nodes){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-individual-nodes}

-   [Is a domain member a complete node or only one interface of a
    node?[¶](#section-a.2-1.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-1.1}
-   [Are nodes permanent members of a given domain, or are join and
    leave operations
    possible?[¶](#section-a.2-1.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-1.2}
-   [Are nodes physical or virtual
    devices?[¶](#section-a.2-1.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-1.3}
-   [Are virtual nodes general purpose or limited to specific functions,
    applications, or
    users?[¶](#section-a.2-1.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-1.4}
-   [Are nodes constrained (by battery,
    etc.)?[¶](#section-a.2-1.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-1.5}
-   [Are devices installed \"out of the box\" or
    pre-configured?[¶](#section-a.2-1.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.2-1.6}
:::
:::

::: {#tax-boundary}
::: {#section-a.3 .section}
## [A.3.](#section-a.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Domain Boundary](#name-domain-boundary){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-domain-boundary}

-   [How is the domain boundary identified or
    defined?[¶](#section-a.3-1.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.3-1.1}
-   [Is the domain boundary fixed or
    dynamic?[¶](#section-a.3-1.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.3-1.2}
-   [Are boundary nodes special, or can any node be at the
    boundary?[¶](#section-a.3-1.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.3-1.3}
:::
:::

::: {#tax-topo}
::: {#section-a.4 .section}
## [A.4.](#section-a.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Topology](#name-topology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-topology}

-   [Is the domain a subset of a Layer 2 or 3 connectivity
    domain?[¶](#section-a.4-1.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.4-1.1}
-   [Does the domain overlap other domains? (In other words, is a node
    allowed to be a member of multiple
    domains?)[¶](#section-a.4-1.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.4-1.2}
-   [Does the domain match physical topology, or does it have a virtual
    (overlay)
    topology?[¶](#section-a.4-1.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.4-1.3}
-   [Is the domain in a single building, vehicle, or campus? Or is it
    distributed?[¶](#section-a.4-1.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.4-1.4}
-   [If distributed, are the interconnections private or over the
    Internet?[¶](#section-a.4-1.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.4-1.5}
-   [In IP addressing terms, is the domain Link local, Site local, or
    Global?[¶](#section-a.4-1.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.4-1.6}
-   [Does the scope of IP unicast or multicast addresses map to the
    domain boundary?[¶](#section-a.4-1.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.4-1.7}
:::
:::

::: {#tax-tech}
::: {#section-a.5 .section}
## [A.5.](#section-a.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Technology](#name-technology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-technology}

-   [What routing protocol(s) or different forwarding mechanisms (MPLS
    or other non-IP mechanism) are
    used?[¶](#section-a.5-1.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.5-1.1}
-   [In an overlay domain, what overlay technique is used (L2VPN, L3VPN,
    etc.)?[¶](#section-a.5-1.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.5-1.2}
-   [Are there specific QoS
    requirements?[¶](#section-a.5-1.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.5-1.3}
-   [Link latency - Normal or long latency
    links?[¶](#section-a.5-1.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.5-1.4}
-   [Mobility - Are nodes mobile? Is the whole network
    mobile?[¶](#section-a.5-1.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.5-1.5}
-   [Which specific technologies, such as those in [Section
    4](#example-sol){.xref}, are
    applicable?[¶](#section-a.5-1.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.5-1.6}
:::
:::

::: {#tax-connect}
::: {#section-a.6 .section}
## [A.6.](#section-a.6){.section-number .selfRef} [Connection to the Internet](#name-connection-to-the-internet){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-connection-to-the-internet}

-   [Is the Internet connection permanent or intermittent? (Never
    connected is out of
    scope.)[¶](#section-a.6-1.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.6-1.1}
-   [What traffic is blocked, in and
    out?[¶](#section-a.6-1.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.6-1.2}
-   [What traffic is allowed, in and
    out?[¶](#section-a.6-1.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.6-1.3}
-   [What traffic is transformed, in and
    out?[¶](#section-a.6-1.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.6-1.4}
-   [Is secure and privileged remote access
    needed?[¶](#section-a.6-1.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.6-1.5}
-   [Does the domain allow unprivileged remote
    sessions?[¶](#section-a.6-1.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.6-1.6}
:::
:::

::: {#tax-sec}
::: {#section-a.7 .section}
## [A.7.](#section-a.7){.section-number .selfRef} [Security, Trust, and Privacy Model](#name-security-trust-and-privacy-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-trust-and-privacy-}

-   [Must domain members be
    authorized?[¶](#section-a.7-1.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.7-1.1}
-   [Are all nodes in the domain at the same trust
    level?[¶](#section-a.7-1.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.7-1.2}
-   [Is traffic
    authenticated?[¶](#section-a.7-1.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.7-1.3}
-   [Is traffic
    encrypted?[¶](#section-a.7-1.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.7-1.4}
-   [What is hidden from the
    outside?[¶](#section-a.7-1.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.7-1.5}
:::
:::

::: {#tax-ops}
::: {#section-a.8 .section}
## [A.8.](#section-a.8){.section-number .selfRef} [Operations](#name-operations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-operations}

-   [Safety level - Does the domain have a critical (human) safety
    role?[¶](#section-a.8-1.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.8-1.1}
-   [Reliability requirement - Normal or
    99.999%?[¶](#section-a.8-1.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.8-1.2}
-   [Environment - Hazardous
    conditions?[¶](#section-a.8-1.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.8-1.3}
-   [Installation - Are specialists
    needed?[¶](#section-a.8-1.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.8-1.4}
-   [Service visits - Easy, difficult, or
    impossible?[¶](#section-a.8-1.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.8-1.5}
-   [Software/firmware updates - Possible or
    impossible?[¶](#section-a.8-1.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-a.8-1.6}
:::
:::

::: {#tax-usage}
::: {#section-a.9 .section}
## [A.9.](#section-a.9){.section-number .selfRef} [Making Use of This Taxonomy](#name-making-use-of-this-taxonomy){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-making-use-of-this-taxonomy}

This taxonomy could be used to design or analyze a specific type of
limited domain. For the present document, it is intended only to form a
background to the scope of protocols used in limited domains and the
mechanisms required to securely define domain membership and
properties.[¶](#section-a.9-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#ack}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

Useful comments were received from [Amelia Andersdotter]{.contact-name},
[Edward Birrane]{.contact-name}, [David Black]{.contact-name}, [Ron
Bonica]{.contact-name}, [Mohamed Boucadair]{.contact-name}, [Tim
Chown]{.contact-name}, [Darren Dukes]{.contact-name}, [Donald
Eastlake]{.contact-name}, [Adrian Farrel]{.contact-name}, [Tom
Herbert]{.contact-name}, [Ben Kaduk]{.contact-name}, [John
Klensin]{.contact-name}, [Mirja Kuehlewind]{.contact-name}, [Warren
Kumari]{.contact-name}, [Andy Malis]{.contact-name}, [Michael
Richardson]{.contact-name}, [Mark Smith]{.contact-name}, [Rick
Taylor]{.contact-name}, [Niels ten Oever]{.contact-name}, and
others.[¶](#section-appendix.b-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#contr}
::: {#section-appendix.c .section}
## [Contributors](#name-contributors){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-contributors}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Sheng Jiang]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Huawei Technologies]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Q14, Huawei Campus]{.extended-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[No. 156 Beiqing Road]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Hai-Dian District, Beijing]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[100095]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[China]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <jiangsheng@huawei.com>
:::
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.d .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Brian Carpenter]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[The University of Auckland]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[School of Computer Science\
University of Auckland]{.extended-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[PB 92019]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Auckland]{.locality} [1142]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[New Zealand]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <brian.e.carpenter@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Bing Liu]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Huawei Technologies]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Q14, Huawei Campus]{.extended-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[No. 156 Beiqing Road]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Hai-Dian District, Beijing]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[100095]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[China]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <leo.liubing@huawei.com>
:::
:::
:::
