  RFC 8837        WebRTC QoS        January 2021
  --------------- ----------------- --------------
  Jones, et al.   Standards Track   \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8837](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8837){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   January 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    P. Jones
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Dhesikan
    :::

    ::: org
    Individual
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    C. Jennings
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    D. Druta
    :::

    ::: org
    AT&T
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8837 {#rfcnum}

# Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) Packet Markings for WebRTC QoS {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

Networks can provide different forwarding treatments for individual
packets based on Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) values on a
per-hop basis. This document provides the recommended DSCP values for
web browsers to use for various classes of Web Real-Time Communication
(WebRTC) traffic.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8837>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Relation to Other
    Specifications](#name-relation-to-other-specifica){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Inputs](#name-inputs){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [DSCP
    Mappings](#name-dscp-mappings){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Downward
    References](#name-downward-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1}
        [9.1](#section-9.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.2}
        [9.2](#section-9.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Dedication](#name-dedication){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [](#section-appendix.c){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.12.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) \[[RFC2474](#RFC2474){.xref}\]
packet marking can help provide QoS in some environments. This
specification provides default packet marking for browsers that support
WebRTC applications, but does not change any advice or requirements in
other RFCs. The contents of this specification are intended to be a
simple set of implementation recommendations based on previous
RFCs.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

Networks in which these DSCP markings are beneficial (likely to improve
QoS for WebRTC traffic) include:[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

1.  [Private, wide-area networks. Network administrators have control
    over remarking packets and treatment of
    packets.[¶](#section-1-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-1-3.1}
2.  [Residential Networks. If the congested link is the broadband uplink
    in a cable or DSL scenario, residential routers/NAT often support
    preferential treatment based on
    DSCP.[¶](#section-1-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-1-3.2}
3.  [Wireless Networks. If the congested link is a local wireless
    network, marking may
    help.[¶](#section-1-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-1-3.3}

There are cases where these DSCP markings do not help but, aside from
possible priority inversion for \"Less-than-Best-Effort traffic\" (see
[Section 5](#dscp-mappings){.xref}), they seldom make things worse if
packets are marked appropriately.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

DSCP values are, in principle, site specific with each site selecting
its own code points for controlling per-hop behavior to influence the
QoS for transport-layer flows. However, in the WebRTC use cases, the
browsers need to set them to something when there is no site-specific
information. This document describes a subset of DSCP code point values
drawn from existing RFCs and common usage for use with WebRTC
applications. These code points are intended to be the default values
used by a WebRTC application. While other values could be used, using a
non-default value may result in unexpected per-hop behavior. It is
[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} that WebRTC applications use non-default values
only in private networks that are configured to use different
values.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

This specification defines inputs that are provided by the WebRTC
application hosted in the browser that aid the browser in determining
how to set the various packet markings. The specification also defines
the mapping from abstract QoS policies (flow type, priority level) to
those packet markings.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

The terms \"browser\" and \"non-browser\" are defined in
\[[RFC7742](#RFC7742){.xref}\] and carry the same meaning in this
document.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Relation to Other Specifications](#name-relation-to-other-specifica){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-relation-to-other-specifica}

This document is a complement to \[[RFC7657](#RFC7657){.xref}\], which
describes the interaction between DSCP and real-time communications.
That RFC covers the implications of using various DSCP values,
particularly focusing on the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP)
\[[RFC3550](#RFC3550){.xref}\] streams that are multiplexed onto a
single transport-layer flow.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

There are a number of guidelines specified in
\[[RFC7657](#RFC7657){.xref}\] that apply to marking traffic sent by
WebRTC applications, as it is common for multiple RTP streams to be
multiplexed on the same transport-layer flow. Generally, the RTP streams
would be marked with a value as appropriate from [Table
1](#tab-dscp){.xref}. A WebRTC application might also multiplex data
channel \[[RFC8831](#RFC8831){.xref}\] traffic over the same 5-tuple as
RTP streams, which would also be marked per that table. The guidance in
\[[RFC7657](#RFC7657){.xref}\] says that all data channel traffic would
be marked with a single value that is typically different from the
value(s) used for RTP streams multiplexed with the data channel traffic
over the same 5-tuple, assuming RTP streams are marked with a value
other than Default Forwarding (DF). This is expanded upon further in the
next section.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

This specification does not change or override the advice in any other
RFCs about setting packet markings. Rather, it simply selects a subset
of DSCP values that is relevant in the WebRTC
context.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

The DSCP value set by the endpoint is not trusted by the network. In
addition, the DSCP value may be remarked at any place in the network for
a variety of reasons to any other DSCP value, including the DF value to
provide basic best-effort service. Even so, there is a benefit to
marking traffic even if it only benefits the first few hops. The
implications are discussed in [Section
3.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7657#section-3.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC7657](#RFC7657){.xref}\]. Further, a mitigation for such action is
through an authorization mechanism. Such an authorization mechanism is
outside the scope of this document.[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Inputs](#name-inputs){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-inputs}

This document recommends DSCP values for two classes of WebRTC
flows:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

-   [media flows that are RTP streams
    \[[RFC8834](#RFC8834){.xref}\][¶](#section-4-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.1}
-   [data flows that are data channels
    \[[RFC8831](#RFC8831){.xref}\][¶](#section-4-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.2}

Each of the RTP streams and distinct data channels consist of all of the
packets associated with an independent media entity, so an RTP stream or
distinct data channel is not always equivalent to a transport-layer flow
defined by a 5-tuple (source address, destination address, source port,
destination port, and protocol). There may be multiple RTP streams and
data channels multiplexed over the same 5-tuple, with each having a
different level of importance to the application and, therefore,
potentially marked using different DSCP values than another RTP stream
or data channel within the same transport-layer flow. (Note that there
are restrictions with respect to marking different data channels carried
within the same Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) association
as outlined in [Section
5](#dscp-mappings){.xref}.)[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}

The following are the inputs provided by the WebRTC application to the
browser:[¶](#section-4-4){.pilcrow}

-   [Flow Type: The application provides this input because it knows if
    the flow is audio, interactive video (\[[RFC4594](#RFC4594){.xref}\]
    \[[G.1010](#G.1010){.xref}\]) with or without audio, or
    data.[¶](#section-4-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-5.1}
-   [Application Priority: Another input is the relative importance of
    an RTP stream or data channel. Many applications have multiple flows
    of the same flow type and some flows are often more important than
    others. For example, in a video conference where there are usually
    audio and video flows, the audio flow may be more important than the
    video flow. JavaScript applications can tell the browser whether a
    particular flow is of High, Medium, Low, or Very Low importance to
    the application.[¶](#section-4-5.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-5.2}

\[[RFC8835](#RFC8835){.xref}\] defines in more detail what an individual
flow is within the WebRTC context and priorities for media and data
flows.[¶](#section-4-6){.pilcrow}

Currently in WebRTC, media sent over RTP is assumed to be interactive
\[[RFC8835](#RFC8835){.xref}\] and browser APIs do not exist to allow an
application to differentiate between interactive and non-interactive
video.[¶](#section-4-7){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#dscp-mappings}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [DSCP Mappings](#name-dscp-mappings){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-dscp-mappings}

The DSCP values for each flow type of interest to WebRTC based on
application priority are shown in [Table 1](#tab-dscp){.xref}. These
values are based on the framework and recommended values in
\[[RFC4594](#RFC4594){.xref}\]. A web browser [SHOULD]{.bcp14} use these
values to mark the appropriate media packets. More information on
Expedited Forwarding (EF) and Assured Forwarding (AF) can be found in
\[[RFC3246](#RFC3246){.xref}\] and \[[RFC2597](#RFC2597){.xref}\],
respectively. DF is Default Forwarding, which provides the basic
best-effort service
\[[RFC2474](#RFC2474){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

WebRTC\'s use of multiple DSCP values may result in packets with certain
DSCP values being blocked by a network. See [Section
4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8835#section-4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8835](#RFC8835){.xref}\] for further discussion, including how
WebRTC implementations establish and maintain connectivity when such
blocking is encountered.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-recommended-dscp-values-for}

::: {#tab-dscp}
  Flow Type                                     Very Low   Low      Medium                High
  --------------------------------------------- ---------- -------- --------------------- ---------------------
  Audio                                         LE (1)     DF (0)   EF (46)               EF (46)
                                                                                          
  Interactive Video with or without Audio       LE (1)     DF (0)   AF42, AF43 (36, 38)   AF41, AF42 (34, 36)
                                                                                          
  Non-Interactive Video with or without Audio   LE (1)     DF (0)   AF32, AF33 (28, 30)   AF31, AF32 (26, 28)
                                                                                          
  Data                                          LE (1)     DF (0)   AF11                  AF21

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [Recommended DSCP Values for WebRTC
  Applications](#name-recommended-dscp-values-for){.selfRef}
:::

The application priority, indicated by the columns \"Very Low\",
\"Low\", \"Medium\", and \"High\", signifies the relative importance of
the flow within the application. It is an input that the browser
receives to assist in selecting the DSCP value and adjusting the network
transport behavior.[¶](#section-5-4){.pilcrow}

The above table assumes that packets marked with LE are treated as lower
effort (i.e., \"less than best effort\"), such as the LE behavior
described in \[[RFC8622](#RFC8622){.xref}\]. However, the treatment of
LE is implementation dependent. If an implementation treats LE as other
than \"less than best effort\", then the actual priority (or, more
precisely, the per-hop behavior) of the packets may be changed from what
is intended. It is common for LE to be treated the same as DF, so
applications and browsers using LE cannot assume that LE will be treated
differently than DF \[[RFC7657](#RFC7657){.xref}\]. During development
of this document, the CS1 DSCP was recommended for \"very low\"
application priority traffic; implementations that followed that
recommendation [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be updated to use the LE DSCP instead of
the CS1 DSCP.[¶](#section-5-5){.pilcrow}

Implementers should also note that excess EF traffic is dropped. This
could mean that a packet marked as EF may not get through, although the
same packet marked with a different DSCP value would have gotten
through. This is not a flaw, but how excess EF traffic is intended to be
treated.[¶](#section-5-6){.pilcrow}

The browser [SHOULD]{.bcp14} first select the flow type of the flow.
Within the flow type, the relative importance of the flow
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} be used to select the appropriate DSCP
value.[¶](#section-5-7){.pilcrow}

Currently, all WebRTC video is assumed to be interactive
\[[RFC8835](#RFC8835){.xref}\], for which the interactive video DSCP
values in Table 1 [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be used. Browsers [MUST NOT]{.bcp14}
use the AF3x DSCP values (for non-interactive video in Table 1) for
WebRTC applications. Non-browser implementations of WebRTC [MAY]{.bcp14}
use the AF3x DSCP values for video that is known not to be interactive,
e.g., all video in a WebRTC video playback application that is not
implemented in a browser.[¶](#section-5-8){.pilcrow}

The combination of flow type and application priority provides
specificity and helps in selecting the right DSCP value for the flow.
All packets within a flow [SHOULD]{.bcp14} have the same application
priority. In some cases, the selected application priority cell may have
multiple DSCP values, such as AF41 and AF42. These offer different drop
precedences. The different drop precedence values provide additional
granularity in classifying packets within a flow. For example, in a
video conference, the video flow may have medium application priority,
thus either AF42 or AF43 may be selected. More important video packets
(e.g., a video picture or frame encoded without any dependency on any
prior pictures or frames) might be marked with AF42 and less important
packets (e.g., a video picture or frame encoded based on the content of
one or more prior pictures or frames) might be marked with AF43 (e.g.,
receipt of the more important packets enables a video renderer to
continue after one or more packets are lost).[¶](#section-5-9){.pilcrow}

It is worth noting that the application priority is utilized by the
coupled congestion control mechanism for media flows per
\[[RFC8699](#RFC8699){.xref}\] and the SCTP scheduler for data channel
traffic per \[[RFC8831](#RFC8831){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-10){.pilcrow}

For reasons discussed in [Section
6](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7657#section-6){.relref} of
\[[RFC7657](#RFC7657){.xref}\], if multiple flows are multiplexed using
a reliable transport (e.g., TCP), then all of the packets for all flows
multiplexed over that transport-layer flow [MUST]{.bcp14} be marked
using the same DSCP value. Likewise, all WebRTC data channel packets
transmitted over an SCTP association [MUST]{.bcp14} be marked using the
same DSCP value, regardless of how many data channels (streams) exist or
what kind of traffic is carried over the various SCTP streams. In the
event that the browser wishes to change the DSCP value in use for an
SCTP association, it [MUST]{.bcp14} reset the SCTP congestion controller
after changing values. However, frequent changes in the DSCP value used
for an SCTP association are discouraged, as this would defeat any
attempts at effectively managing congestion. It should also be noted
that any change in DSCP value that results in a reset of the congestion
controller puts the SCTP association back into slow start, which may
have undesirable effects on application
performance.[¶](#section-5-11){.pilcrow}

For the data channel traffic multiplexed over an SCTP association, it is
[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} that the DSCP value selected be the one associated
with the highest priority requested for all data channels multiplexed
over the SCTP association. Likewise, when multiplexing multiple flows
over a TCP connection, the DSCP value selected [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be the
one associated with the highest priority requested for all multiplexed
flows.[¶](#section-5-12){.pilcrow}

If a packet enters a network that has no support for a
flow-type-application priority combination specified in [Table
1](#tab-dscp){.xref}, then the network node at the edge will remark the
DSCP value based on policies. This could result in the flow not getting
the network treatment it expects based on the original DSCP value in the
packet. Subsequently, if the packet enters a network that supports a
larger number of these combinations, there may not be sufficient
information in the packet to restore the original markings. Mechanisms
for restoring such original DSCP is outside the scope of this
document.[¶](#section-5-13){.pilcrow}

In summary, DSCP marking provides neither guarantees nor promised levels
of service. However, DSCP marking is expected to provide a statistical
improvement in real-time service as a whole. The service provided to a
packet is dependent upon the network design along the path, as well as
the network conditions at every hop.[¶](#section-5-14){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

Since the JavaScript application specifies the flow type and application
priority that determine the media flow DSCP values used by the browser,
the browser could consider application use of a large number of higher
priority flows to be suspicious. If the server hosting the JavaScript
application is compromised, many browsers within the network might
simultaneously transmit flows with the same DSCP marking. The Diffserv
architecture requires ingress traffic conditioning for reasons that
include protecting the network from this sort of
attack.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

Otherwise, this specification does not add any additional security
implications beyond those addressed in the following DSCP-related
specifications. For security implications on use of DSCP, please refer
to [Section
7](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7657#section-7){.relref} of
\[[RFC7657](#RFC7657){.xref}\] and [Section
6](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4594#section-6){.relref} of
\[[RFC4594](#RFC4594){.xref}\]. Please also see
\[[RFC8826](#RFC8826){.xref}\] as an additional
reference.[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Downward References](#name-downward-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-downward-references}

This specification contains downwards references to
\[[RFC4594](#RFC4594){.xref}\] and \[[RFC7657](#RFC7657){.xref}\].
However, the parts of the former RFCs used by this specification are
sufficiently stable for these downward references. The guidance in the
latter RFC is necessary to understand the Diffserv technology used in
this document and the motivation for the recommended DSCP values and
procedures.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-9.1 .section}
### [9.1.](#section-9.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC4594\]
:   [Babiarz, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Chan, K.]{.refAuthor}[, and F.
    Baker]{.refAuthor}, [\"Configuration Guidelines for DiffServ Service
    Classes\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4594]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4594]{.seriesInfo}, August 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4594>\>.
:   

\[RFC7657\]
:   [Black, D., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and P. Jones]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Differentiated Services (Diffserv) and Real-Time
    Communication\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7657]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7657]{.seriesInfo}, November 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7657>\>.
:   

\[RFC7742\]
:   [Roach, A.B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"WebRTC Video Processing and Codec
    Requirements\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7742]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7742]{.seriesInfo}, March 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7742>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8622\]
:   [Bless, R.]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Lower-Effort Per-Hop Behavior (LE PHB)
    for Differentiated Services\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8622]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC8622]{.seriesInfo}, June 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8622>\>.
:   

\[RFC8826\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Security Considerations for
    WebRTC\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8826]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8826]{.seriesInfo}, January 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8826>\>.
:   

\[RFC8831\]
:   [Jesup, R.]{.refAuthor}[, Loreto, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and M.
    Tüxen]{.refAuthor}, [\"WebRTC Data Channels\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8831]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8831]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2021, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8831>\>.
:   

\[RFC8834\]
:   [Perkins, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Westerlund, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Ott]{.refAuthor}, [\"Media Transport and Use of RTP in
    WebRTC\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8834]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8834]{.seriesInfo}, January 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8834>\>.
:   

\[RFC8835\]
:   [Alvestrand, H.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Transports for
    WebRTC\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8835]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8835]{.seriesInfo}, January 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8835>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-9.2 .section}
### [9.2.](#section-9.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[G.1010\]
:   [ITU-T]{.refAuthor}, [\"End-user multimedia QoS
    categories\"]{.refTitle}, [ITU-T Recommendation
    G.1010]{.seriesInfo}, November 2001,
    \<<https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.1010-200111-I/en>\>.
:   

\[RFC2474\]
:   [Nichols, K.]{.refAuthor}[, Blake, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Baker, F.]{.refAuthor}[, and D. Black]{.refAuthor}, [\"Definition of
    the Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6
    Headers\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2474]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2474]{.seriesInfo}, December 1998,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2474>\>.
:   

\[RFC2597\]
:   [Heinanen, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Baker, F.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Weiss, W.]{.refAuthor}[, and J. Wroclawski]{.refAuthor}, [\"Assured
    Forwarding PHB Group\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2597]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2597]{.seriesInfo}, June 1999,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2597>\>.
:   

\[RFC3246\]
:   [Davie, B.]{.refAuthor}[, Charny, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Bennet,
    J.C.R.]{.refAuthor}[, Benson, K.]{.refAuthor}[, Le Boudec,
    J.Y.]{.refAuthor}[, Courtney, W.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Davari, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Firoiu, V.]{.refAuthor}[, and D.
    Stiliadis]{.refAuthor}, [\"An Expedited Forwarding PHB (Per-Hop
    Behavior)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3246]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3246]{.seriesInfo}, March 2002,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3246>\>.
:   

\[RFC3550\]
:   [Schulzrinne, H.]{.refAuthor}[, Casner, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Frederick, R.]{.refAuthor}[, and V. Jacobson]{.refAuthor}, [\"RTP: A
    Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    64]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 3550]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3550]{.seriesInfo}, July 2003,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3550>\>.
:   

\[RFC8699\]
:   [Islam, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Welzl, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Gjessing]{.refAuthor}, [\"Coupled Congestion Control for RTP
    Media\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8699]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8699]{.seriesInfo}, January 2020,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8699>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

Thanks to [David Black]{.contact-name}, [Magnus
Westerlund]{.contact-name}, [Paolo Severini]{.contact-name}, [Jim
Hasselbrook]{.contact-name}, [Joe Marcus]{.contact-name}, [Erik
Nordmark]{.contact-name}, [Michael Tüxen]{.contact-name}, and [Brian
Carpenter]{.contact-name} for their invaluable
input.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Dedication](#name-dedication){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-dedication}

This document is dedicated to the memory of [James Polk]{.contact-name},
a long-time friend and colleague. James made important contributions to
this specification, including serving initially as one of the primary
authors. The IETF global community mourns his loss and he will be missed
dearly.[¶](#section-appendix.b-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.c .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Paul E. Jones]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <paulej@packetizer.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Subha Dhesikan]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Individual]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <sdhesikan@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cullen Jennings]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <fluffy@cisco.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Dan Druta]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[AT&T]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <dd5826@att.com>
:::
:::
:::
