  RFC 8869         Wireless Test Cases for Interactive Real   January 2021
  ---------------- ------------------------------------------ --------------
  Sarker, et al.   Informational                              \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8869](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8869){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   January 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    Z. Sarker
    :::

    ::: org
    Ericsson AB
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    X. Zhu
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Fu
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8869 {#rfcnum}

# Evaluation Test Cases for Interactive Real-Time Media over Wireless Networks {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

The Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) is a common transport choice for
interactive multimedia communication applications. The performance of
these applications typically depends on a well-functioning congestion
control algorithm. To ensure a seamless and robust user experience, a
well-designed RTP-based congestion control algorithm should work well
across all access network types. This document describes test cases for
evaluating performances of candidate congestion control algorithms over
cellular and Wi-Fi networks.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Not all documents approved
by the IESG are candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see
Section 2 of RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8869>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Cellular Network Specific Test
    Cases](#name-cellular-network-specific-t){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1}
        [2.1](#section-2.1){.xref}.  [Varying Network
        Load](#name-varying-network-load){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.1){.pilcrow}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.2.1}
            [2.1.1](#section-2.1.1){.xref}.  [Network
            Connection](#name-network-connection){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.2.2}
            [2.1.2](#section-2.1.2){.xref}.  [Simulation
            Setup](#name-simulation-setup){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.2.3}
            [2.1.3](#section-2.1.3){.xref}.  [Expected
            Behavior](#name-expected-behavior){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2}
        [2.2](#section-2.2){.xref}.  [Bad Radio
        Coverage](#name-bad-radio-coverage){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2.1){.pilcrow}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2.2.1}
            [2.2.1](#section-2.2.1){.xref}.  [Network
            Connection](#name-network-connection-2){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2.2.2}
            [2.2.2](#section-2.2.2){.xref}.  [Simulation
            Setup](#name-simulation-setup-2){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2.2.3}
            [2.2.3](#section-2.2.3){.xref}.  [Expected
            Behavior](#name-expected-behavior-2){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.3}
        [2.3](#section-2.3){.xref}.  [Desired Evaluation Metrics for
        Cellular Test
        Cases](#name-desired-evaluation-metrics-){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Wi-Fi Networks Specific Test
    Cases](#name-wi-fi-networks-specific-tes){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [Bottleneck in Wired
        Network](#name-bottleneck-in-wired-network){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.1){.pilcrow}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.1}
            [3.1.1](#section-3.1.1){.xref}.  [Network
            Topology](#name-network-topology){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.2}
            [3.1.2](#section-3.1.2){.xref}.  [Test/Simulation
            Setup](#name-test-simulation-setup){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.3}
            [3.1.3](#section-3.1.3){.xref}.  [Typical Test
            Scenarios](#name-typical-test-scenarios){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.4}
            [3.1.4](#section-3.1.4){.xref}.  [Expected
            Behavior](#name-expected-behavior-3){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.4.1){.pilcrow}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [Bottleneck in Wi-Fi
        Network](#name-bottleneck-in-wi-fi-network){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.1){.pilcrow}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.1}
            [3.2.1](#section-3.2.1){.xref}.  [Network
            Topology](#name-network-topology-2){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.2}
            [3.2.2](#section-3.2.2){.xref}.  [Test/Simulation
            Setup](#name-test-simulation-setup-2){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.3}
            [3.2.3](#section-3.2.3){.xref}.  [Typical Test
            Scenarios](#name-typical-test-scenarios-2){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.4}
            [3.2.4](#section-3.2.4){.xref}.  [Expected
            Behavior](#name-expected-behavior-4){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.4.1){.pilcrow}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3}
        [3.3](#section-3.3){.xref}.  [Other Potential Test
        Cases](#name-other-potential-test-cases){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3.1){.pilcrow}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3.2.1}
            [3.3.1](#section-3.3.1){.xref}.  [EDCA/WMM
            usage](#name-edca-wmm-usage){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3.2.2}
            [3.3.2](#section-3.3.2){.xref}.  [Effect of Heterogeneous
            Link
            Rates](#name-effect-of-heterogeneous-lin){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
            :::
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1}
        [6.1](#section-6.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2}
        [6.2](#section-6.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Contributors](#name-contributors){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#section-appendix.c){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

Wireless networks (both cellular and Wi-Fi
\[[IEEE802.11](#IEEE802.11){.xref}\]) are an integral and increasingly
more significant part of the Internet. Typical application scenarios for
interactive multimedia communication over wireless include video
conferencing calls in a bus or train as well as live media streaming at
home. It is well known that the characteristics and technical challenges
for supporting multimedia services over wireless are very different from
those of providing the same service over a wired network. Although the
basic test cases as defined in \[[RFC8867](#RFC8867){.xref}\] have
covered many common effects of network impairments for evaluating
RTP-based congestion control schemes, they remain to be tested over
characteristics and dynamics unique to a given wireless environment. For
example, in cellular networks, the base station maintains individual
queues per radio bearer per user hence it leads to a different nature of
interactions between traffic flows of different users. This contrasts
with a typical wired network setting where traffic flows from all users
share the same queue at the bottleneck. Furthermore, user mobility
patterns in a cellular network differ from those in a Wi-Fi network.
Therefore, it is important to evaluate the performance of proposed
candidate RTP-based congestion control solutions over cellular mobile
networks and over Wi-Fi networks
respectively.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

\[[RFC8868](#RFC8868){.xref}\] provides guidelines for evaluating
candidate algorithms and recognizes the importance of testing over
wireless access networks. However, it does not describe any specific
test cases for performance evaluation of candidate algorithms. This
document describes test cases specifically targeting cellular and Wi-Fi
networks.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Cellular Network Specific Test Cases](#name-cellular-network-specific-t){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-cellular-network-specific-t}

A cellular environment is more complicated than its wireline counterpart
since it seeks to provide services in the context of variable available
bandwidth, location dependencies, and user mobilities at different
speeds. In a cellular network, the user may reach the cell edge, which
may lead to a significant number of retransmissions to deliver the data
from the base station to the destination and vice versa. These radio
links will often act as a bottleneck for the rest of the network and
will eventually lead to excessive delays or packet drops. An efficient
retransmission or link adaptation mechanism can reduce the packet loss
probability, but some packet losses and delay variations will remain.
Moreover, with increased cell load or handover to a congested cell,
congestion in the transport network will become even worse. Besides,
there exist certain characteristics that distinguish the cellular
network from other wireless access networks such as Wi-Fi. In a cellular
network:[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-2-2.1}
    The bottleneck is often a shared link with relatively few
    users.[¶](#section-2-2.1.1){.pilcrow}

    -   [The cost per bit over the shared link varies over time and is
        different for different
        users.[¶](#section-2-2.1.2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.1.2.1}
    -   [Leftover/unused resources can be consumed by other greedy
        users.[¶](#section-2-2.1.2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.1.2.2}
    :::

-   [Queues are always per radio bearer, hence each user can have many
    such queues.[¶](#section-2-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.2}

-   [Users can experience both inter- and intra-Radio Access Technology
    (RAT) handovers (see \[[HO-def-3GPP](#HO-def-3GPP){.xref}\] for the
    definition of
    \"handover\").[¶](#section-2-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.3}

-   [Handover between cells or change of serving cells (as described in
    \[[HO-LTE-3GPP](#HO-LTE-3GPP){.xref}\] and
    \[[HO-UMTS-3GPP](#HO-UMTS-3GPP){.xref}\]) might cause user plane
    interruptions, which can lead to bursts of packet losses, delay,
    and/or jitter. The exact behavior depends on the type of radio
    bearer. Typically, the default best-effort bearers do not generate
    packet loss, instead, packets are queued up and transmitted once the
    handover is completed.[¶](#section-2-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.4}

-   [The network part decides how much the user can
    transmit.[¶](#section-2-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.5}

-   ::: {#section-2-2.6}
    The cellular network has variable link capacity per
    user.[¶](#section-2-2.6.1){.pilcrow}

    -   [It can vary as fast as a period of
        milliseconds.[¶](#section-2-2.6.2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.6.2.1}
    -   [It depends on many factors (such as distance, speed,
        interference, different
        flows).[¶](#section-2-2.6.2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.6.2.2}
    -   [It uses complex and smart link adaptation, which makes the link
        behavior ever more
        dynamic.[¶](#section-2-2.6.2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.6.2.3}
    -   [The scheduling priority depends on the estimated
        throughput.[¶](#section-2-2.6.2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.6.2.4}
    :::

-   [Both Quality of Service (QoS) and non-QoS radio bearers can be
    used.[¶](#section-2-2.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-2.7}

Hence, a real-time communication application operating over a cellular
network needs to cope with a shared bottleneck link and variable link
capacity, events like handover, non-congestion-related loss, and abrupt
changes in bandwidth (both short term and long term) due to handover,
network load, and bad radio coverage. Even though 3GPP has defined QoS
bearers \[[QoS-3GPP](#QoS-3GPP){.xref}\] to ensure high-quality user
experience, it is still preferable for real-time applications to behave
in an adaptive manner.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

Different mobile operators deploy their own cellular networks with their
own set of network functionalities and policies. Usually, a mobile
operator network includes a range of radio access technologies such as
3G and 4G/LTE. Looking at the specifications of such radio technologies,
it is evident that only the more recent radio technologies can support
the high bandwidth requirements from real-time interactive video
applications. Future real-time interactive applications will impose even
greater demand on cellular network performance, which makes 4G (and
beyond) radio technologies more suitable for such genre of
application.[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

The key factors in defining test cases for cellular networks
are:[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}

-   [Shared and varying link
    capacity[¶](#section-2-6.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-6.1}
-   [Mobility[¶](#section-2-6.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-6.2}
-   [Handover[¶](#section-2-6.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-6.3}

However, these factors are typically highly correlated in a cellular
network. Therefore, instead of devising separate test cases for
individual important events, we have divided the test cases into two
categories. It should be noted that the goal of the following test cases
is to evaluate the performance of candidate algorithms over the radio
interface of the cellular network. Hence, it is assumed that the radio
interface is the bottleneck link between the communicating peers and
that the core network does not introduce any extra congestion along the
path. Consequently, this document has left out of scope the combination
of multiple access technologies involving both cellular and Wi-Fi users.
In this latter case, the shared bottleneck is likely at the wired
backhaul link. These test cases further assume a typical real-time
telephony scenario where one real-time session consists of one voice
stream and one video stream.[¶](#section-2-7){.pilcrow}

Even though it is possible to carry out tests over operational cellular
networks (e.g., LTE/5G), and actually such tests are already available
today, these tests cannot in general be carried out in a deterministic
fashion to ensure repeatability. The main reason is that these networks
are controlled by cellular operators, and there exists various amounts
of competing traffic in the same cell(s). In practice, it is only in
underground mines that one can carry out near deterministic testing.
Even there, it is not guaranteed either as workers in the mines may
carry with them their personal mobile phones. Furthermore, the
underground mining setting may not reflect typical usage patterns in an
urban setting. We, therefore, recommend that a cellular network
simulator be used for the test cases defined in this document, for
example \-- the LTE simulator in
\[[NS-3](#NS-3){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-8){.pilcrow}

::: {#VNL}
::: {#section-2.1 .section}
### [2.1.](#section-2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Varying Network Load](#name-varying-network-load){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-varying-network-load}

The goal of this test is to evaluate the performance of the candidate
congestion control algorithm under varying network load. The network
load variation is created by adding and removing network users, a.k.a.
User Equipment (UE), during the simulation. In this test case, each
user/UE in the media session is an endpoint following RTP-based
congestion control. User arrivals follow a Poisson distribution
proportional to the length of the call, to keep the number of users per
cell fairly constant during the evaluation period. At the beginning of
the simulation, there should be enough time to warm up the network. This
is to avoid running the evaluation in an empty network where network
nodes have empty buffers and low interference at the beginning of the
simulation. This network initialization period should be excluded from
the evaluation period. Typically, the evaluation period starts 30
seconds after test initialization.[¶](#section-2.1-1){.pilcrow}

This test case also includes user mobility and some competing traffic.
The latter includes both the same types of flows (with same adaptation
algorithms) and different types of flows (with different services and
congestion control schemes).[¶](#section-2.1-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#NC-VNL}
::: {#section-2.1.1 .section}
#### [2.1.1.](#section-2.1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Network Connection](#name-network-connection){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-network-connection}

Each mobile user is connected to a fixed user. The connection between
the mobile user and fixed user consists of a cellular radio access, an
Evolved Packet Core (EPC), and an Internet connection. The mobile user
is connected to the EPC using cellular radio access technology, which is
further connected to the Internet. At the other end, the fixed user is
connected to the Internet via a wired connection with sufficiently high
bandwidth, for instance, 10 Gbps, so that the system bottleneck is on
the cellular radio access interface. The wired connection in this setup
does not introduce any network impairments to the test; it only adds 10
ms of one-way propagation delay.[¶](#section-2.1.1-1){.pilcrow}

The path from the fixed user to the mobile users is defined as
\"downlink\", and the path from the mobile users to the fixed user is
defined as \"uplink\". We assume that only uplink or downlink is
congested for mobile users. Hence, we recommend that the uplink and
downlink simulations are run separately.[¶](#section-2.1.1-2){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-simulation-topology}

::: {#fig-siml-topology}
::: {#section-2.1.1-3.1 .artwork .art-text .alignCenter}
                     uplink
    ++)))        +-------------------------->
    ++-+      ((o))
    |  |       / \     +-------+     +------+    +---+
    +--+      /   \----+       +-----+      +----+   |
             /     \   +-------+     +------+    +---+
     UE         BS        EPC        Internet    fixed
                 <--------------------------+
                          downlink
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [Simulation
Topology](#name-simulation-topology){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#SS-VNL}
::: {#section-2.1.2 .section}
#### [2.1.2.](#section-2.1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Simulation Setup](#name-simulation-setup){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-simulation-setup}

The values enclosed within \"\[ \]\" for the following simulation
attributes follow the same notion as in \[[RFC8867](#RFC8867){.xref}\].
The desired simulation setup is as
follows:[¶](#section-2.1.2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Radio environment:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Deployment and propagation model:
    :   3GPP case 1 (see
        \[[HO-deploy-3GPP](#HO-deploy-3GPP){.xref}\])[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.2.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Antenna:
    :   Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output (MIMO), 2D or 3D antenna
        pattern[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.2.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Mobility:
    :   \[3 km/h, 30 km/h\][¶](#section-2.1.2-2.2.2.6){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Transmission bandwidth:
    :   10 MHz[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.2.2.8){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Number of cells:
    :   multi-cell deployment (3 cells per Base Station (BS) \* 7 BS) =
        21 cells[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.2.2.10){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Cell radius:
    :   166.666 meters[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.2.2.12){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Scheduler:
    :   Proportional fair with no
        priority[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.2.2.14){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Bearer:
    :   Default bearer for all
        traffic[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.2.2.16){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Active Queue Management (AQM) settings:
    :   AQM \[on, off\][¶](#section-2.1.2-2.2.2.18){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   

End-to-end Round Trip Time (RTT):
:   \[40 ms, 150 ms\][¶](#section-2.1.2-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

User arrival model:
:   Poisson arrival model[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

User intensity:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Downlink user intensity:
    :   {0.7, 1.4, 2.1, 2.8, 3.5, 4.2, 4.9, 5.6, 6.3, 7.0, 7.7, 8.4,
        9,1, 9.8, 10.5}[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.8.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Uplink user intensity:
    :   {0.7, 1.4, 2.1, 2.8, 3.5, 4.2, 4.9, 5.6, 6.3,
        7.0}[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.8.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   

Simulation duration:
:   91 s[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.10){.pilcrow}
:   

Evaluation period:
:   30 s - 60 s[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.12){.pilcrow}
:   

Media traffic:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Media type:

    :   Video[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.2.1){.pilcrow}

        []{.break}

        Media direction:
        :   \[uplink,
            downlink\][¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.2.2.2){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Number of media sources per user:
        :   One (1)[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.2.2.4){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Media duration per user:
        :   30 s[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.2.2.6){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Media source:
        :   same as defined in [Section
            4.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8867#section-4.3){.relref}
            of
            \[[RFC8867](#RFC8867){.xref}\][¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.2.2.8){.pilcrow}
        :   

    :   

    Media type:

    :   Audio[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.4.1){.pilcrow}

        []{.break}

        Media direction:
        :   \[uplink,
            downlink\][¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.4.2.2){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Number of media sources per user:
        :   One (1)[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.4.2.4){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Media duration per user:
        :   30 s[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.4.2.6){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Media codec:
        :   Constant Bit Rate
            (CBR)[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.4.2.8){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Media bitrate:
        :   20 Kbps[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.4.2.10){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Adaptation:
        :   off[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.14.2.4.2.12){.pilcrow}
        :   

    :   

:   

Other traffic models:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Downlink simulation:
    :   Maximum of 4 Mbps/cell (web browsing or FTP traffic following
        default TCP congestion control
        \[[RFC5681](#RFC5681){.xref}\])[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.16.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Uplink simulation:
    :   Maximum of 2 Mbps/cell (web browsing or FTP traffic following
        default TCP congestion control
        \[[RFC5681](#RFC5681){.xref}\])[¶](#section-2.1.2-2.16.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-2.1.3 .section}
#### [2.1.3.](#section-2.1.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Expected Behavior](#name-expected-behavior){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-expected-behavior}

The investigated congestion control algorithms should result in maximum
possible network utilization and stability in terms of rate variations,
lowest possible end-to-end frame latency, network latency, and Packet
Loss Rate (PLR) at different cell load
levels.[¶](#section-2.1.3-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-2.2 .section}
### [2.2.](#section-2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Bad Radio Coverage](#name-bad-radio-coverage){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-bad-radio-coverage}

The goal of this test is to evaluate the performance of the candidate
congestion control algorithm when users visit part of the network with
bad radio coverage. The scenario is created by using a larger cell
radius than that in the previous test case. In this test case, each
user/UE in the media session is an endpoint following RTP-based
congestion control. User arrivals follow a Poisson distribution
proportional to the length of the call, to keep the number of users per
cell fairly constant during the evaluation period. At the beginning of
the simulation, there should be enough time to warm up the network. This
is to avoid running the evaluation in an empty network where network
nodes have empty buffers and low interference at the beginning of the
simulation. This network initialization period should be excluded from
the evaluation period. Typically, the evaluation period starts 30
seconds after test initialization.[¶](#section-2.2-1){.pilcrow}

This test case also includes user mobility and some competing traffic.
The latter includes the same kind of flows (with same adaptation
algorithms).[¶](#section-2.2-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-2.2.1 .section}
#### [2.2.1.](#section-2.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Network Connection](#name-network-connection-2){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-network-connection-2}

Same as defined in [Section
2.1.1](#NC-VNL){.xref}.[¶](#section-2.2.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2.2.2 .section}
#### [2.2.2.](#section-2.2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Simulation Setup](#name-simulation-setup-2){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-simulation-setup-2}

The desired simulation setup is the same as the Varying Network Load
test case defined in [Section 2.1](#VNL){.xref} except for the following
changes:[¶](#section-2.2.2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Radio environment:

:   Same as defined in [Section 2.1.2](#SS-VNL){.xref} except for the
    following:[¶](#section-2.2.2-2.2.1){.pilcrow}

    []{.break}

    Deployment and propagation model:
    :   3GPP case 3 (see
        \[[HO-deploy-3GPP](#HO-deploy-3GPP){.xref}\])[¶](#section-2.2.2-2.2.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Cell radius:
    :   577.3333 meters[¶](#section-2.2.2-2.2.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Mobility:
    :   3 km/h[¶](#section-2.2.2-2.2.2.6){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   

User intensity:
:   {0.7, 1.4, 2.1, 2.8, 3.5, 4.2, 4.9, 5.6, 6.3,
    7.0}[¶](#section-2.2.2-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Media traffic model:
:   Same as defined in [Section
    2.1.2](#SS-VNL){.xref}[¶](#section-2.2.2-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Other traffic models:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Downlink simulation:
    :   Maximum of 2 Mbps/cell (web browsing or FTP traffic following
        default TCP congestion control
        \[[RFC5681](#RFC5681){.xref}\])[¶](#section-2.2.2-2.8.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Uplink simulation:
    :   Maximum of 1 Mbps/cell (web browsing or FTP traffic following
        default TCP congestion control
        \[[RFC5681](#RFC5681){.xref}\])[¶](#section-2.2.2-2.8.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   
:::

::: {#section-2.2.3 .section}
#### [2.2.3.](#section-2.2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Expected Behavior](#name-expected-behavior-2){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-expected-behavior-2}

The investigated congestion control algorithms should result in maximum
possible network utilization and stability in terms of rate variations,
lowest possible end-to-end frame latency, network latency, and Packet
Loss Rate (PLR) at different cell load
levels.[¶](#section-2.2.3-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-2.3 .section}
### [2.3.](#section-2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Desired Evaluation Metrics for Cellular Test Cases](#name-desired-evaluation-metrics-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-desired-evaluation-metrics-}

The evaluation criteria document \[[RFC8868](#RFC8868){.xref}\] defines
the metrics to be used to evaluate candidate algorithms. Considering the
nature and distinction of cellular networks, we recommend that at least
the following metrics be used to evaluate the performance of the
candidate algorithms:[¶](#section-2.3-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Average cell throughput (for all cells), shows cell
    utilization.[¶](#section-2.3-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2.3-2.1}
-   [Application sending and receiving bitrate,
    goodput.[¶](#section-2.3-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2.3-2.2}
-   [Packet Loss Rate
    (PLR).[¶](#section-2.3-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-2.3-2.3}
-   [End-to-end media frame delay. For video, this means the delay from
    capture to
    display.[¶](#section-2.3-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-2.3-2.4}
-   [Transport delay.[¶](#section-2.3-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-2.3-2.5}
-   [Algorithm stability in terms of rate
    variation.[¶](#section-2.3-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-2.3-2.6}
:::
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Wi-Fi Networks Specific Test Cases](#name-wi-fi-networks-specific-tes){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-wi-fi-networks-specific-tes}

Given the prevalence of Internet access links over Wi-Fi, it is
important to evaluate candidate RTP-based congestion control solutions
over test cases that include Wi-Fi access links. Such evaluations should
highlight the inherently different characteristics of Wi-Fi networks in
contrast to their wired counterparts:[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

-   [The wireless radio channel is subject to interference from nearby
    transmitters, multipath fading, and shadowing. These effects lead to
    fluctuations in the link throughput and sometimes an error-prone
    communication
    environment.[¶](#section-3-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.1}
-   [Available network bandwidth is not only shared over the air between
    concurrent users but also between uplink and downlink traffic due to
    the half-duplex nature of the wireless transmission
    medium.[¶](#section-3-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.2}
-   [Packet transmissions over Wi-Fi are susceptible to contentions and
    collisions over the air. Consequently, traffic load beyond a certain
    utilization level over a Wi-Fi network can introduce frequent
    collisions over the air and significant network overhead, as well as
    packet drops due to buffer overflow at the transmitters. This, in
    turn, leads to excessive delay, retransmissions, packet losses, and
    lower effective bandwidth for applications. Note further that the
    collision-induced delay and loss patterns are qualitatively
    different from those caused by congestion over a wired
    connection.[¶](#section-3-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.3}
-   [The IEEE 802.11 standard (i.e., Wi-Fi) supports multi-rate
    transmission capabilities by dynamically choosing the most
    appropriate modulation and coding scheme (MCS) for the given
    received signal strength. A different choice in the MCS Index leads
    to different physical-layer (PHY-layer) link rates and consequently
    different application-layer
    throughput.[¶](#section-3-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.4}
-   [The presence of legacy devices (e.g., ones operating only in IEEE
    802.11b) at a much lower PHY-layer link rate can significantly slow
    down the rest of a modern Wi-Fi network. As discussed in
    \[[Heusse2003](#Heusse2003){.xref}\], the main reason for such
    anomaly is that it takes much longer to transmit the same packet
    over a slower link than over a faster link, thereby consuming a
    substantial portion of air
    time.[¶](#section-3-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.5}
-   [Handover from one Wi-Fi Access Point (AP) to another may lead to
    excessive packet delays and losses during the
    process.[¶](#section-3-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.6}
-   [IEEE 802.11e has introduced the Enhanced Distributed Channel Access
    (EDCA) mechanism to allow different traffic categories to contend
    for channel access using different random back-off parameters. This
    mechanism is a mandatory requirement for the Wi-Fi Multimedia (WMM)
    certification in Wi-Fi Alliance. It allows for prioritization of
    real-time application traffic such as voice and video over
    non-urgent data transmissions (e.g., file
    transfer).[¶](#section-3-2.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.7}

In summary, the presence of Wi-Fi access links in different network
topologies can exert different impacts on the network performance in
terms of application-layer effective throughput, packet loss rate, and
packet delivery delay. These, in turn, will influence the behavior of
end-to-end real-time multimedia congestion
control.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

Unless otherwise mentioned, the test cases in this section choose the
PHY- and MAC-layer parameters based on the IEEE 802.11n standard.
Statistics collected from enterprise Wi-Fi networks show that the two
dominant physical modes are 802.11n and 802.11ac, accounting for 41% and
58% of connected devices, respectively. As Wi-Fi standards evolve over
time \-- for instance, with the introduction of the emerging Wi-Fi 6
(based on IEEE 802.11ax) products \-- the PHY- and MAC-layer test case
specifications need to be updated accordingly to reflect such
changes.[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}

Typically, a Wi-Fi access network connects to a wired infrastructure.
Either the wired or the Wi-Fi segment of the network can be the
bottleneck. The following sections describe basic test cases for both
scenarios separately. The same set of performance metrics as in
\[[RFC8867](#RFC8867){.xref}\]) should be collected for each test
case.[¶](#section-3-5){.pilcrow}

We recommend carrying out the test cases as defined in this document
using a simulator, such as \[[NS-2](#NS-2){.xref}\] or
\[[NS-3](#NS-3){.xref}\]. When feasible, it is encouraged to perform
testbed-based evaluations using Wi-Fi access points and endpoints
running up-to-date IEEE 802.11 protocols, such as 802.11ac and the
emerging Wi-Fi 6, so as to verify the viability of the candidate
schemes.[¶](#section-3-6){.pilcrow}

::: {#sec-wired-bottleneck}
::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Bottleneck in Wired Network](#name-bottleneck-in-wired-network){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-bottleneck-in-wired-network}

The test scenarios below are intended to mimic the setup of video
conferencing over Wi-Fi connections from the home. Typically, the Wi-Fi
home network is not congested, and the bottleneck is present over the
wired home access link. Although it is expected that test evaluation
results from this section are similar to those in
\[[RFC8867](#RFC8867){.xref}\], it is still worthwhile to run through
these tests as sanity checks.[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#sec-wifi-wired-bottleneck-topo}
::: {#section-3.1.1 .section}
#### [3.1.1.](#section-3.1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Network Topology](#name-network-topology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-network-topology}

[Figure 2](#fig-wifi-test-topology){.xref} shows the network topology of
Wi-Fi test cases. The test contains multiple mobile nodes (MNs)
connected to a common Wi-Fi AP and their corresponding wired clients on
fixed nodes (FNs). Each connection carries either an RTP-based media
flow or a TCP traffic flow. Directions of the flows can be uplink (i.e.,
from mobile nodes to fixed nodes), downlink (i.e., from fixed nodes to
mobile nodes), or bidirectional. The total number of
uplink/downlink/bidirectional flows for RTP-based media traffic and TCP
traffic are denoted as N and M,
respectively.[¶](#section-3.1.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-network-topology-for-wi-fi-}

::: {#fig-wifi-test-topology}
::: {#section-3.1.1-2.1 .artwork .art-text .alignCenter}
                                 Uplink
                           +----------------->+
          +------+                                       +------+
          | MN_1 |))))                             /=====| FN_1 |
          +------+    ))                          //     +------+
              .        ))                        //         .
              .         ))                      //          .
              .          ))                    //           .
          +------+         +----+         +-----+        +------+
          | MN_N | ))))))) |    |         |     |========| FN_N |
          +------+         |    |         |     |        +------+
                           | AP |=========| FN0 |
         +----------+      |    |         |     |      +----------+
         | MN_tcp_1 | )))) |    |         |     |======| FN_tcp_1 |
         +----------+      +----+         +-----+      +----------+
               .          ))                 \\             .
               .         ))                   \\            .
               .        ))                     \\           .
         +----------+  ))                       \\     +----------+
         | MN_tcp_M |)))                         \=====| FN_tcp_M |
         +----------+                                  +----------+
                          +<-----------------+
                                  Downlink
:::

[Figure 2](#figure-2){.selfRef}: [Network Topology for Wi-Fi Test
Cases](#name-network-topology-for-wi-fi-){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-3.1.2 .section}
#### [3.1.2.](#section-3.1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Test/Simulation Setup](#name-test-simulation-setup){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-test-simulation-setup}

[]{.break}

Test duration:
:   120 s[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Wi-Fi network characteristics:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Radio propagation model:
    :   Log-distance path loss propagation model (see
        \[[NS3WiFi](#NS3WiFi){.xref}\])[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.4.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    PHY- and MAC-layer configuration:
    :   IEEE 802.11n[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.4.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    MCS Index at 11:
    :   Raw data rate at 52 Mbps, 16-QAM (Quadrature amplitude
        modulation) and 1/2 coding
        rate[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.4.2.6){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   

Wired path characteristics:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Path capacity:
    :   1 Mbps[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.6.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    One-way propagation delay:
    :   50 ms[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.6.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Maximum end-to-end jitter:
    :   30 ms[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.6.2.6){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Bottleneck queue type:
    :   Drop tail[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.6.2.8){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Bottleneck queue size:
    :   300 ms[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.6.2.10){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Path loss ratio:
    :   0%[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.6.2.12){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   

Application characteristics:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Media traffic:

    :   \

        []{.break}

        Media type:
        :   Video[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.2.2.2){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Media direction:
        :   See [Section
            3.1.3](#subsec-4-1-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.2.2.4){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Number of media sources (N):
        :   See [Section
            3.1.3](#subsec-4-1-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.2.2.6){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Media timeline:

        :   \

            []{.break}

            Start time:
            :   0 s[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.2.2.8.2.2){.pilcrow}
            :   

            End time:
            :   119 s[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.2.2.8.2.4){.pilcrow}
            :   

        :   

    :   

    Competing traffic:

    :   \

        []{.break}

        Type of sources:
        :   Long-lived TCP or CBR over
            UDP[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.4.2.2){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Traffic direction:
        :   See [Section
            3.1.3](#subsec-4-1-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.4.2.4){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Number of sources (M):
        :   See [Section
            3.1.3](#subsec-4-1-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.4.2.6){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Congestion control:
        :   Default TCP congestion control
            \[[RFC5681](#RFC5681){.xref}\] or CBR traffic over
            UDP[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.4.2.8){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Traffic timeline:
        :   See [Section
            3.1.3](#subsec-4-1-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.1.2-1.8.2.4.2.10){.pilcrow}
        :   

    :   

:   
:::

::: {#subsec-4-1-3}
::: {#section-3.1.3 .section}
#### [3.1.3.](#section-3.1.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Typical Test Scenarios](#name-typical-test-scenarios){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-typical-test-scenarios}

[]{.break}

Single uplink RTP-based media flow:
:   N=1 with uplink direction and M=0.[¶](#section-3.1.3-1.2){.pilcrow}
:   

One pair of bidirectional RTP-based media flows:
:   N=2 (i.e., one uplink flow and one downlink flow);
    M=0.[¶](#section-3.1.3-1.4){.pilcrow}
:   

One pair of bidirectional RTP-based media flows:
:   N=2; one uplink on-off CBR flow over UDP: M=1 (uplink). The CBR flow
    has ON time at t=0s-60s and OFF time at
    t=60s-119s.[¶](#section-3.1.3-1.6){.pilcrow}
:   

One pair of bidirectional RTP-based media flows:
:   N=2; one uplink off-on CBR flow over UDP: M=1 (uplink). The CBR flow
    has OFF time at t=0s-60s and ON time at
    t=60s-119s.[¶](#section-3.1.3-1.8){.pilcrow}
:   

One RTP-based media flow competing against one long-lived TCP flow in the uplink direction:
:   N=1 (uplink) and M=1 (uplink). The TCP flow has start time at t=0s
    and end time at t=119s.[¶](#section-3.1.3-1.10){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-3.1.4 .section}
#### [3.1.4.](#section-3.1.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Expected Behavior](#name-expected-behavior-3){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-expected-behavior-3}

[]{.break}

Single uplink RTP-based media flow:
:   The candidate algorithm is expected to detect the path capacity
    constraint, to converge to the bottleneck link capacity, and to
    adapt the flow to avoid unwanted oscillations when the sending bit
    rate is approaching the bottleneck link capacity. No excessive
    oscillations in the media rate should be
    present.[¶](#section-3.1.4-1.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Bidirectional RTP-based media flows:
:   The candidate algorithm is expected to converge to the bottleneck
    capacity of the wired path in both directions despite the presence
    of measurement noise over the Wi-Fi connection. In the presence of
    background TCP or CBR over UDP traffic, the rate of RTP-based media
    flows should adapt promptly to the arrival and departure of
    background traffic flows.[¶](#section-3.1.4-1.4){.pilcrow}
:   

One RTP-based media flow competing with long-lived TCP flow in the uplink direction:
:   The candidate algorithm is expected to avoid congestion collapse and
    to stabilize at a fair share of the bottleneck link
    capacity.[¶](#section-3.1.4-1.6){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Bottleneck in Wi-Fi Network](#name-bottleneck-in-wi-fi-network){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-bottleneck-in-wi-fi-network}

The test cases in this section assume that the wired segment along the
media path is well-provisioned, whereas the bottleneck exists over the
Wi-Fi access network. This is to mimic the application scenarios
typically encountered by users in an enterprise environment or at a
coffee house.[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-3.2.1 .section}
#### [3.2.1.](#section-3.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Network Topology](#name-network-topology-2){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-network-topology-2}

Same as defined in [Section
3.1.1](#sec-wifi-wired-bottleneck-topo){.xref}.[¶](#section-3.2.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3.2.2 .section}
#### [3.2.2.](#section-3.2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Test/Simulation Setup](#name-test-simulation-setup-2){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-test-simulation-setup-2}

[]{.break}

Test duration:
:   120 s[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Wi-Fi network characteristics:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Radio propagation model:
    :   Log-distance path loss propagation model (see
        \[[NS3WiFi](#NS3WiFi){.xref}\])[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.4.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    PHY- and MAC-layer configuration:
    :   IEEE 802.11n[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.4.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    MCS Index at 11:
    :   Raw data rate at 52 Mbps, 16-QAM (Quadrature amplitude
        modulation) and 1/2 coding
        rate[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.4.2.6){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   

Wired path characteristics:

:   \

    []{.break}

    Path capacity:
    :   100 Mbps[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.6.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    One-Way propagation delay:
    :   50 ms[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.6.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Maximum end-to-end jitter:
    :   30 ms[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.6.2.6){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Bottleneck queue type:
    :   Drop tail[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.6.2.8){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Bottleneck queue size:
    :   300 ms[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.6.2.10){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Path loss ratio:
    :   0%[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.6.2.12){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   

Application characteristics

:   \

    []{.break}

    Media traffic:

    :   \

        []{.break}

        Media type:
        :   Video[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.2.2.2){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Media direction:
        :   See [Section
            3.2.3](#subsec-4-2-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.2.2.4){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Number of media sources (N):
        :   See [Section
            3.2.3](#subsec-4-2-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.2.2.6){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Media timeline:

        :   \

            []{.break}

            Start time:
            :   0 s[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.2.2.8.2.2){.pilcrow}
            :   

            End time:
            :   119 s[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.2.2.8.2.4){.pilcrow}
            :   

        :   

    :   

    Competing traffic:

    :   \

        []{.break}

        Type of sources:
        :   long-lived TCP or CBR over
            UDP[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.4.2.2){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Number of sources (M):
        :   See [Section
            3.2.3](#subsec-4-2-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.4.2.4){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Traffic direction:
        :   See [Section
            3.2.3](#subsec-4-2-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.4.2.6){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Congestion control:
        :   Default TCP congestion control
            \[[RFC5681](#RFC5681){.xref}\] or CBR traffic over
            UDP[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.4.2.8){.pilcrow}
        :   

        Traffic timeline:
        :   See [Section
            3.2.3](#subsec-4-2-3){.xref}[¶](#section-3.2.2-1.8.2.4.2.10){.pilcrow}
        :   

    :   

:   
:::

::: {#subsec-4-2-3}
::: {#section-3.2.3 .section}
#### [3.2.3.](#section-3.2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Typical Test Scenarios](#name-typical-test-scenarios-2){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-typical-test-scenarios-2}

This section describes a few test scenarios that are deemed as important
for understanding the behavior of a candidate RTP-based congestion
control scheme over a Wi-Fi network.[¶](#section-3.2.3-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Multiple RTP-based media flows sharing the wireless downlink:
:   N=16 (all downlink); M=0. This test case is for studying the impact
    of contention on the multiple concurrent media flows. For an 802.11n
    network, given the MCS Index of 11 and the corresponding link rate
    of 52 Mbps, the total application-layer throughput (assuming
    reasonable distance, low interference, and infrequent contentions
    caused by competing streams) is around 20 Mbps. A total of N=16
    RTP-based media flows (with a maximum rate of 1.5 Mbps each) are
    expected to saturate the wireless interface in this experiment.
    Evaluation of a given candidate scheme should focus on whether the
    downlink media flows can stabilize at a fair share of the total
    application-layer throughput.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Multiple RTP-based media flows sharing the wireless uplink:
:   N=16 (all uplink); M=0. When multiple clients attempt to transmit
    media packets uplink over the Wi-Fi network, they introduce more
    frequent contentions and potential collisions. Per-flow throughput
    is expected to be lower than that in the previous downlink-only
    scenario. Evaluation of a given candidate scheme should focus on
    whether the uplink flows can stabilize at a fair share of the total
    application-layer throughput.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Multiple bidirectional RTP-based media flows:
:   N=16 (8 uplink and 8 downlink); M=0. The goal of this test is to
    evaluate the performance of the candidate scheme in terms of
    bandwidth fairness between uplink and downlink
    flows.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Multiple bidirectional RTP-based media flows with on-off CBR traffic over UDP:
:   N=16 (8 uplink and 8 downlink); M=5 (uplink). The goal of this test
    is to evaluate the adaptation behavior of the candidate scheme when
    its available bandwidth changes due to the departure of background
    traffic. The background traffic consists of several (e.g., M=5) CBR
    flows transported over UDP. These background flows are ON at time
    t=0-60s and OFF at time t=61-120s.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Multiple bidirectional RTP-based media flows with off-on CBR traffic over UDP:
:   N=16 (8 uplink and 8 downlink); M=5 (uplink). The goal of this test
    is to evaluate the adaptation behavior of the candidate scheme when
    its available bandwidth changes due to the arrival of background
    traffic. The background traffic consists of several (e.g., M=5)
    parallel CBR flows transported over UDP. These background flows are
    OFF at time t=0-60s and ON at times
    t=61-120s.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2.10){.pilcrow}
:   

Multiple bidirectional RTP-based media flows in the presence of background TCP traffic:
:   N=16 (8 uplink and 8 downlink); M=5 (uplink). The goal of this test
    is to evaluate how RTP-based media flows compete against TCP over a
    congested Wi-Fi network for a given candidate scheme. TCP flows have
    start time at t=40s and end time at
    t=80s.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2.12){.pilcrow}
:   

Varying number of RTP-based media flows:
:   A series of tests can be carried out for the above test cases with
    different values of N, e.g., N=\[4, 8, 12, 16, 20\]. The goal of
    this test is to evaluate how a candidate scheme responds to varying
    traffic load/demand over a congested Wi-Fi network. The start times
    of the media flows are randomly distributed within a window of
    t=0-10s; their end times are randomly distributed within a window of
    t=110-120s.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2.14){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-3.2.4 .section}
#### [3.2.4.](#section-3.2.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Expected Behavior](#name-expected-behavior-4){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-expected-behavior-4}

[]{.break}

Multiple downlink RTP-based media flows:
:   Each media flow is expected to get its fair share of the total
    bottleneck link bandwidth. Overall bandwidth usage should not be
    significantly lower than that experienced by the same number of
    concurrent downlink TCP flows. In other words, the behavior of
    multiple concurrent TCP flows will be used as a performance
    benchmark for this test scenario. The end-to-end delay and packet
    loss ratio experienced by each flow should be within an acceptable
    range for real-time multimedia
    applications.[¶](#section-3.2.4-1.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Multiple uplink RTP-based media flows:
:   Overall bandwidth usage by all media flows should not be
    significantly lower than that experienced by the same number of
    concurrent uplink TCP flows. In other words, the behavior of
    multiple concurrent TCP flows will be used as a performance
    benchmark for this test scenario.[¶](#section-3.2.4-1.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Multiple bidirectional RTP-based media flows with dynamic background traffic carrying CBR flows over UDP:
:   The media flows are expected to adapt in a timely fashion to the
    changes in available bandwidth introduced by the arrival/departure
    of background traffic.[¶](#section-3.2.4-1.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Multiple bidirectional RTP-based media flows with dynamic background traffic over TCP:
:   During the presence of TCP background flows, the overall bandwidth
    usage by all media flows should not be significantly lower than
    those achieved by the same number of bidirectional TCP flows. In
    other words, the behavior of multiple concurrent TCP flows will be
    used as a performance benchmark for this test scenario. All downlink
    media flows are expected to obtain similar bandwidth as each other.
    The throughput of each media flow is expected to decrease upon the
    arrival of TCP background traffic and, conversely, increase upon
    their departure. Both reactions should occur in a timely fashion,
    for example, within 10s of seconds.[¶](#section-3.2.4-1.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Varying number of bidirectional RTP-based media flows:
:   The test results for varying values of N \-- while keeping all other
    parameters constant \-- is expected to show steady and stable
    per-flow throughput for each value of N. The average throughput of
    all media flows is expected to stay constant around the maximum rate
    when N is small, then gradually decrease with increasing value of N
    till it reaches the minimum allowed rate, beyond which the offered
    load to the Wi-Fi network exceeds its capacity (i.e., with a very
    large value of N).[¶](#section-3.2.4-1.10){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-3.3 .section}
### [3.3.](#section-3.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Other Potential Test Cases](#name-other-potential-test-cases){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-other-potential-test-cases}

::: {#sec-edca-wmm-usage}
::: {#section-3.3.1 .section}
#### [3.3.1.](#section-3.3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [EDCA/WMM usage](#name-edca-wmm-usage){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-edca-wmm-usage}

The EDCA/WMM mechanism defines prioritized QoS for four traffic classes
(or Access Categories). RTP-based real-time media flows should achieve
better performance in terms of lower delay and fewer packet losses with
EDCA/WMM enabled when competing against non-interactive background
traffic such as file transfers. When most of the traffic over Wi-Fi is
dominated by media, however, turning on WMM may degrade performance
since all media flows now attempt to access the wireless transmission
medium more aggressively, thereby causing more frequent collisions and
collision-induced losses. This is a topic worthy of further
investigation.[¶](#section-3.3.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sec-legacy-effects}
::: {#section-3.3.2 .section}
#### [3.3.2.](#section-3.3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Effect of Heterogeneous Link Rates](#name-effect-of-heterogeneous-lin){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-effect-of-heterogeneous-lin}

As discussed in \[[Heusse2003](#Heusse2003){.xref}\], the presence of
clients operating over slow PHY-layer link rates (e.g., a legacy 802.11b
device) connected to a modern network may adversely impact the overall
performance of the network. Additional test cases can be devised to
evaluate the effect of clients with heterogeneous link rates on the
performance of the candidate congestion control algorithm. Such test
cases, for instance, can specify that the PHY-layer link rates for all
clients span over a wide range (e.g., 2 Mbps to 54 Mbps) for
investigating its effect on the congestion control behavior of the
real-time interactive applications.[¶](#section-3.3.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

The security considerations in \[[RFC8868](#RFC8868){.xref}\] and the
relevant congestion control algorithms apply. The principles for
congestion control are described in \[[RFC2914](#RFC2914){.xref}\], and
in particular, any new method must implement safeguards to avoid
congestion collapse of the Internet.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

Given the difficulty of deterministic wireless testing, it is
recommended and expected that the tests described in this document would
be done via simulations. However, in the case where these test cases are
carried out in a testbed setting, the evaluation should take place in a
controlled lab environment. In the testbed, the applications,
simulators, and network nodes ought to be well-behaved and should not
impact the desired results. It is important to take appropriate caution
to avoid leaking nonresponsive traffic with unproven congestion
avoidance behavior onto the open Internet.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-6.1 .section}
### [6.1.](#section-6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[HO-deploy-3GPP\]
:   [3GPP]{.refAuthor}, [\"Physical layer aspects for evolved Universal
    Terrestrial Radio Access (UTRA)\"]{.refTitle}, [TS
    25.814]{.seriesInfo}, October 2006,
    \<<http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/specs/archive/25_series/25.814/25814-710.zip>\>.
:   

\[IEEE802.11\]
:   [IEEE]{.refAuthor}, [\"Standard for Information
    technology\--Telecommunications and information exchange between
    systems Local and metropolitan area networks\--Specific requirements
    Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer
    (PHY) Specifications\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE 802.11-2012]{.seriesInfo},
    \<<https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7786995>\>.
:   

\[NS3WiFi\]
:   [\"ns3::YansWifiChannel Class Reference\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.nsnam.org/doxygen/classns3_1_1_yans_wifi_channel.html>\>.
:   

\[RFC5681\]
:   [Allman, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Paxson, V.]{.refAuthor}[, and E.
    Blanton]{.refAuthor}, [\"TCP Congestion Control\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5681]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5681]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2009, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5681>\>.
:   

\[RFC8867\]
:   [Sarker, Z.]{.refAuthor}[, Singh, V.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Zhu, X.]{.refAuthor}[, and M. Ramalho]{.refAuthor}, [\"Test Cases
    for Evaluating Congestion Control for Interactive Real-Time
    Media\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8867]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8867]{.seriesInfo}, January 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8867>\>.
:   

\[RFC8868\]
:   [Singh, V.]{.refAuthor}[, Ott, J.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Holmer]{.refAuthor}, [\"Evaluating Congestion Control for
    Interactive Real-Time Media\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8868]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC8868]{.seriesInfo}, January 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8868>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-6.2 .section}
### [6.2.](#section-6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[Heusse2003\]
:   [Heusse, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Rousseau, F.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Berger-Sabbatel, G.]{.refAuthor}[, and A. Duda]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Performance anomaly of 802.11b\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE INFOCOM
    2003]{.refContent}, [Twenty-second Annual Joint Conference of the
    IEEE Computer and Communications Societies]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/INFCOM.2003.1208921]{.seriesInfo}, March 2003,
    \<<https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1208921>\>.
:   

\[HO-def-3GPP\]
:   [3GPP]{.refAuthor}, [\"Vocabulary for 3GPP
    Specifications\"]{.refTitle}, [3GPP TS 21.905]{.seriesInfo},
    December 2009,
    \<<http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/specs/archive/21_series/21.905/21905-940.zip>\>.
:   

\[HO-LTE-3GPP\]
:   [3GPP]{.refAuthor}, [\"Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access
    (E-UTRA); Radio Resource Control (RRC); Protocol
    specification\"]{.refTitle}, [3GPP TS 36.331]{.seriesInfo}, December
    2011,
    \<<http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/specs/archive/36_series/36.331/36331-990.zip>\>.
:   

\[HO-UMTS-3GPP\]
:   [3GPP]{.refAuthor}, [\"Radio Resource Control (RRC); Protocol
    specification\"]{.refTitle}, [3GPP TS 25.331]{.seriesInfo}, December
    2011,
    \<<http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/specs/archive/25_series/25.331/25331-990.zip>\>.
:   

\[NS-2\]
:   [\"ns-2\"]{.refTitle}, December 2014,
    \<<http://nsnam.sourceforge.net/wiki/index.php/Main_Page>\>.
:   

\[NS-3\]
:   [\"ns-3 Network Simulator\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.nsnam.org/>\>.
:   

\[QoS-3GPP\]
:   [3GPP]{.refAuthor}, [\"Policy and charging control
    architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [3GPP TS 23.203]{.seriesInfo}, June
    2011,
    \<<http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/specs/archive/23_series/23.203/23203-990.zip>\>.
:   

\[RFC2914\]
:   [Floyd, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Congestion Control
    Principles\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 41]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2914]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2914]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2000, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2914>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Contributors](#name-contributors){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-contributors}

The following individuals contributed to the design, implementation, and
verification of the proposed test cases during earlier stages of this
work. They have helped to validate and substantially improve this
specification.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}

[Ingemar Johansson]{.contact-name} \<ingemar.s.johansson\@ericsson.com>
of Ericsson AB contributed to the description and validation of cellular
test cases during the earlier stage of this
document.[¶](#section-appendix.a-2){.pilcrow}

[Wei-Tian Tan]{.contact-name} \<dtan2\@cisco.com> of Cisco Systems
designed and set up a Wi-Fi testbed for evaluating parallel video
conferencing streams, based upon which proposed Wi-Fi test cases are
described. He also recommended additional test cases to consider, such
as the impact of EDCA/WMM usage.[¶](#section-appendix.a-3){.pilcrow}

[Michael A. Ramalho]{.contact-name} \<mar42\@cornell.edu> of
AcousticComms Consulting (previously at Cisco Systems) applied lessons
from Cisco\'s internal experimentation to the draft versions of the
document. He also worked on validating the proposed test cases in a
virtual-machine-based lab setting.[¶](#section-appendix.a-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#Acknowledgments}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

The authors would like to thank [Tomas Frankkila]{.contact-name},
[Magnus Westerlund]{.contact-name}, [Kristofer Sandlund]{.contact-name},
[Sergio Mena de la Cruz]{.contact-name}, and [Mirja
Kühlewind]{.contact-name} for their valuable inputs and review comments
regarding this document.[¶](#section-appendix.b-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.c .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Zaheduzzaman Sarker]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson AB]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Torshamnsgatan 23]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
SE-[164 83]{.postal-code} [Stockholm]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Sweden]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+46 10 717 37 43](tel:+46%2010%20717%2037%2043){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <zaheduzzaman.sarker@ericsson.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Xiaoqing Zhu]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Building 4]{.extended-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[12515 Research Blvd]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Austin]{.locality}, [TX]{.region} [78759]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <xiaoqzhu@cisco.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jiantao Fu]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[771 Alder Drive]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Milpitas]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [95035]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <jianfu@cisco.com>
:::
:::
:::
