  RFC 8884          ICN in Disaster Scenarios   October 2020
  ----------------- --------------------------- --------------
  Seedorf, et al.   Informational               \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)

RFC:
:   [8884](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8884){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   October 2020

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Seedorf
    :::

    ::: org
    HFT Stuttgart - Univ. of Applied Sciences
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Arumaithurai
    :::

    ::: org
    University of Göttingen
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    A. Tagami
    :::

    ::: org
    KDDI Research Inc.
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    K. Ramakrishnan
    :::

    ::: org
    University of California
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    N. Blefari Melazzi
    :::

    ::: org
    University Tor Vergata
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8884 {#rfcnum}

# Research Directions for Using Information-Centric Networking (ICN) in Disaster Scenarios {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

Information-Centric Networking (ICN) is a new paradigm where the network
provides users with named content instead of communication channels
between hosts. This document outlines some research directions for ICN
with respect to applying ICN approaches for coping with natural or
human-generated, large-scale disasters. This document is a product of
the Information-Centric Networking Research Group
(ICNRG).[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
The IRTF publishes the results of Internet-related research and
development activities. These results might not be suitable for
deployment. This RFC represents the consensus of the Information-Centric
Networking Research Group of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
Documents approved for publication by the IRSG are not a candidate for
any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8884>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Disaster
    Scenarios](#name-disaster-scenarios){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Research Challenges and Benefits of
    ICN](#name-research-challenges-and-ben){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [High-Level Research
        Challenges](#name-high-level-research-challen){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [How ICN Can be
        Beneficial](#name-how-icn-can-be-beneficial){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3}
        [3.3](#section-3.3){.xref}.  [ICN as Starting Point vs. Existing
        DTN
        Solutions](#name-icn-as-starting-point-vs-ex){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Use Cases and
    Requirements](#name-use-cases-and-requirements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [ICN-Based Research Approaches and Open
    Research
    Challenges](#name-icn-based-research-approach){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [Suggested ICN-Based Research
        Approaches](#name-suggested-icn-based-researc){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [Open Research
        Challenges](#name-open-research-challenges){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Conclusion](#name-conclusion){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1}
        [9.1](#section-9.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.2}
        [9.2](#section-9.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgment](#name-acknowledgment){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

This document summarizes some research challenges for coping with
natural or human-generated, large-scale disasters. In particular, the
document discusses potential research directions for applying
Information-Centric Networking (ICN) to address these
challenges.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

Research and standardization approaches exist (for instance, see the
work and discussions in the concluded IRTF DTN Research Group
\[[dtnrg](#dtnrg){.xref}\] and in the IETF DTN Working Group
\[[dtnwg](#dtnwg){.xref}\]). In addition, a published Experimental RFC
in the IRTF Stream \[[RFC5050](#RFC5050){.xref}\] discusses
Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN), which is a key necessity for
communicating in the disaster scenarios we are considering in this
document. \'Disconnection tolerance\' can thus be achieved with these
existing DTN approaches. However, while these approaches can provide
independence from an existing communication infrastructure (which indeed
may not work anymore after a disaster has happened), ICN offers key
concepts, such as new naming schemes and innovative multicast
communication, which together enable many essential
(publish/subscribe-based) use cases for communication after a disaster
(e.g., message prioritization, one-to-many delivery of messages, group
communication among rescue teams, and the use cases discussed in
[Section 4](#usecases){.xref}). One could add such features to existing
DTN protocols and solutions; however, in this document, we explore the
use of ICN as a starting point for building a communication architecture
that supports (somewhat limited) communication capabilities after a
disaster. We discuss the relationship between the ICN approaches (for
enabling communication after a disaster) discussed in this document with
existing work from the DTN community in more depth in [Section
3.3](#researchgap){.xref}.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

\'Emergency Support and Disaster Recovery\' is also listed among the ICN
Baseline Scenarios in \[[RFC7476](#RFC7476){.xref}\] as a potential
scenario that \'can be used as a base for the evaluation of different
ICN approaches so that they can be tested and compared against each
other while showcasing their own advantages\'
\[[RFC7476](#RFC7476){.xref}\] . In this regard, this document
complements \[[RFC7476](#RFC7476){.xref}\] by investigating the use of
ICN approaches for \'Emergency Support and Disaster Recovery\' in depth
and discussing the relationship to existing work in the DTN
community.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

This document focuses on ICN-based approaches that can enable
communication after a disaster. These approaches reside mostly on the
network layer. Other solutions for \'Emergency Support and Disaster
Recovery\' (e.g., on the application layer) may complement the ICN-based
networking approaches discussed in this document and expand the solution
space for enabling communications among users after a disaster. In fact,
addressing the use cases explored in this document would require
corresponding applications that would exploit the discussed ICN benefits
on the network layer for users. However, the discussion of applications
or solutions outside of the network layer are outside the scope of this
document.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

This document represents the consensus of the Information-Centric
Networking Research Group (ICNRG); it is not an IETF product and it does
not define a standard. It has been reviewed extensively by the ICN
Research Group (RG) members active in the specific areas of work covered
by the document.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

[Section 2](#disaster){.xref} gives some examples of what can be
considered a large-scale disaster and what the effects of such disasters
on communication networks are. [Section 3](#whyicn){.xref} outlines why
ICN can be beneficial in such scenarios and provides a high-level
overview on corresponding research challenges. [Section
4](#usecases){.xref} describes some concrete use cases and requirements
for disaster scenarios. In [Section 5](#solutions){.xref}, some concrete
ICN-based solutions approaches are outlined.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#disaster}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Disaster Scenarios](#name-disaster-scenarios){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-disaster-scenarios}

An enormous earthquake hit Northeastern Japan (Tohoku areas) on March
11, 2011 and caused extensive damages, including blackouts, fires,
tsunamis, and a nuclear crisis. The lack of information and means of
communication caused the isolation of several Japanese cities. This
impacted the safety and well-being of residents and affected rescue
work, evacuation activities, and the supply chain for food and other
essential items. Even in the Tokyo area, which is 300 km away from the
Tohoku area, more than 100,000 people became \'returner refugees\' who
could not reach their homes because they had no means of public
transportation (the Japanese government has estimated that more than 6.5
million people would become returner refugees if such a catastrophic
disaster were to hit the Tokyo area).[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

That earthquake in Japan also showed that the current network is
vulnerable to disasters. Mobile phones have become the lifelines for
communication, including safety confirmation. Besides (emergency) phone
calls, services in mobile networks commonly being used after a disaster
include network disaster SMS notifications (or SMS \'Cell Broadcast\'
\[[cellbroadcast](#cellbroadcast){.xref}\]), available in most cellular
networks. The aftermath of a disaster puts a high strain on available
resources due to the need for communication by everyone. Authorities,
such as the president or prime minister, local authorities, police, fire
brigades, and rescue and medical personnel, would like to inform the
citizens of possible shelters, food, or even of impending danger.
Relatives would like to communicate with each other and be informed
about their well-being. Affected citizens would like to make inquiries
about food distribution centers and shelters or report trapped and
missing people to the authorities. Moreover, damage to communication
equipment, in addition to the already existing heavy demand for
communication, highlights the issue of fault tolerance and energy
efficiency.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

Additionally, disasters caused by humans (i.e., disasters that are
caused deliberately and willfully and have the element of human intent
such as a terrorist attack) may need to be considered. In such cases,
the perpetrators could be actively harming the network by launching a
denial-of-service attack or by monitoring the network passively to
obtain information exchanged, even after the main disaster itself has
taken place. Unlike some natural disasters that are predictable to a
small extent using weather forecasting technologies, may have a slower
onset, and occur in known geographical regions and seasons, terrorist
attacks almost always occur suddenly without any advance warning.
Nevertheless, there exist many commonalities between natural and
human-induced disasters, particularly relating to response and recovery,
communication, search and rescue, and coordination of
volunteers.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

The timely dissemination of information generated and requested by all
the affected parties during and in the immediate aftermath of a disaster
is difficult to provide within the current context of global information
aggregators (such as Google, Yahoo, Bing, etc.) that need to index the
vast amounts of specialized information related to the disaster.
Specialized coverage of the situation and timely dissemination are key
to successfully managing disaster situations. We believe that network
infrastructure capabilities provided by Information-Centric Networks can
be suitable, in conjunction with application and middleware
assistance.[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#whyicn}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Research Challenges and Benefits of ICN](#name-research-challenges-and-ben){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-research-challenges-and-ben}

::: {#challenges}
::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [High-Level Research Challenges](#name-high-level-research-challen){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-high-level-research-challen}

Given a disaster scenario as described in [Section 2](#disaster){.xref},
on a high level, one can derive the following (incomplete) list of
corresponding technical challenges:[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Enabling usage of functional parts of the infrastructure, even when these are disconnected from the rest of the network:
:   Assuming that parts of the network infrastructure (i.e.,
    cables/links, routers, mobile bases stations, etc.) are functional
    after a disaster has taken place, it is desirable to be able to
    continue using such components for communication as much as
    possible. This is challenging when these components are disconnected
    from the backhaul, thus forming fragmented networks. This is
    especially true for today\'s mobile networks, which are comprised of
    a centralized architecture, mandating connectivity to central
    entities (which are located in the core of the mobile network) for
    communication. But also in fixed networks, access to a name
    resolution service is often necessary to access some given
    content.[¶](#section-3.1-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Decentralized authentication, content integrity, and trust:
:   In mobile networks, users are authenticated via central entities.
    While special services important in a disaster scenario exist and
    may work without authentication (such as SMS \'Cell Broadcast\'
    \[[cellbroadcast](#cellbroadcast){.xref}\] or emergency calls),
    user-to-user (or user-to-authorities) communication is normally not
    possible without being authenticated via a central entity in the
    network. In order to communicate in fragmented or disconnected parts
    of a mobile network, the challenge of decentralizing user
    authentication arises. Independently of the network being fixed or
    mobile, data origin authentication and verifying the correctness of
    content retrieved from the network may be challenging when being
    \'offline\' (e.g., potentially disconnected from content publishers
    as well as from servers of a security infrastructure, which can
    provide missing certificates in a certificate chain or up-to-date
    information on revoked keys/certificates). As the network suddenly
    becomes fragmented or partitioned, trust models may shift
    accordingly to the change in authentication infrastructure being
    used (e.g., one may switch from a PKI to a web-of-trust model, such
    as Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)). Note that blockchain-based approaches
    are, in most cases, likely not suitable for the disaster scenarios
    considered in this document, as the communication capabilities
    needed to find consensus for a new block as well as for retrieving
    blocks at nodes will presumably not be available (or too excessive
    for the remaining infrastructure) after a
    disaster.[¶](#section-3.1-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Delivering/obtaining information and traffic prioritization in congested networks:
:   Due to broken cables, failed routers, etc., it is likely that the
    communication network has much less overall capacity for handling
    traffic in a disaster scenario. Thus, significant congestion can be
    expected in parts of the infrastructure. It is therefore a challenge
    to guarantee message delivery in such a scenario. This is even more
    important because, in the case of a disaster aftermath, it may be
    crucial to deliver certain information to recipients (e.g., warnings
    to citizens) with higher priority than other
    content.[¶](#section-3.1-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Delay/disruption-tolerant approach:
:   Fragmented networks make it difficult to support direct end-to-end
    communication with small or no delay. However, communication in
    general and especially during a disaster can often tolerate some
    form of delay. For example, in order to know if someone\'s relatives
    are safe or not, a corresponding emergency message need not
    necessarily be supported in an end-to-end manner but would also be
    helpful to the human recipient if it can be transported in a
    hop-by-hop fashion with some delay. For these kinds of use cases, it
    is sufficient to improve communication resilience in order to
    deliver such important messages.[¶](#section-3.1-2.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Energy efficiency:
:   Long-lasting power outages may lead to batteries of communication
    devices running out, so designing energy-efficient solutions is very
    important in order to maintain a usable communication
    infrastructure.[¶](#section-3.1-2.10){.pilcrow}
:   

Contextuality:
:   Like any communication in general, disaster scenarios are inherently
    contextual. Aspects of geography, the people affected, the rescue
    communities involved, the languages being used, and many other
    contextual aspects are highly relevant for an efficient realization
    of any rescue effort and, with it, the realization of the required
    communication.[¶](#section-3.1-2.12){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#howicncanhelp}
::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [How ICN Can be Beneficial](#name-how-icn-can-be-beneficial){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-how-icn-can-be-beneficial}

Several aspects of ICN make related approaches attractive candidates for
addressing the challenges described in [Section
3.1](#challenges){.xref}. Below is an (incomplete) list of
considerations why ICN approaches can be beneficial to address these
challenges:[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Routing-by-name:
:   ICN protocols natively route by named data objects and can identify
    objects by names, effectively moving the process of name resolution
    from the application layer to the network layer. This functionality
    is very handy in a fragmented network where reference to
    location-based, fixed addresses may not work as a consequence of
    disruptions. For instance, name resolution with ICN does not
    necessarily rely on the reachability of application-layer servers
    (e.g., DNS resolvers). In highly decentralized scenarios (e.g., in
    infrastructureless, opportunistic environments), the ICN
    routing-by-name paradigm effectively may lead to a
    \'replication-by-name\' approach, where content is replicated
    depending on its name.[¶](#section-3.2-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Integrity and authentication of named data objects:
:   ICN is built around the concept of named data objects. Several
    proposals exist for integrating the concept of \'self-certifying
    data\' into a naming scheme (e.g., see
    \[[RFC6920](#RFC6920){.xref}\]). With such approaches, object
    integrity of data retrieved from the network can be verified without
    relying on a trusted third party or PKI. In addition, given that the
    correct object name is known, such schemes can also provide data
    origin authentication (for instance, see the usage example in
    [Section
    8.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6920#section-8.3){.relref} of
    \[[RFC6920](#RFC6920){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-3.2-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Content-based access control:
:   ICN promotes a data-centric communication model that naturally
    supports content-based security (e.g., allowing access to content
    only to a specific user or class of users). In fact, in ICN, it is
    the content itself that is secured (encrypted), if desired, rather
    than the communication channel. This functionality could facilitate
    trusted communications among peer users in isolated areas of the
    network where a direct communication channel may not always or
    continuously exist.[¶](#section-3.2-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Caching:
:   Caching content along a delivery path is an inherent concept in ICN.
    Caching helps in handling huge amounts of traffic and can help to
    avoid congestion in the network (e.g., congestion in backhaul links
    can be avoided by delivering content from caches at access
    nodes).[¶](#section-3.2-2.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Sessionless:
:   ICN does not require full end-to-end connectivity. This feature
    facilitates a seamless aggregation between a normal network and a
    fragmented network, which needs DTN-like message
    forwarding.[¶](#section-3.2-2.10){.pilcrow}
:   

Potential to run traditional IP-based services (IP-over-ICN):
:   While ICN and DTN promote the development of novel applications that
    fully utilize the new capabilities of the ICN/DTN network, work in
    \[[Trossen2015](#Trossen2015){.xref}\] has shown that an ICN-enabled
    network can transport IP-based services, either directly at IP or
    even at HTTP level. With this, IP- and ICN/DTN-based services can
    coexist, providing the necessary support of legacy applications to
    affected users while reaping any benefits from the native support
    for ICN in future applications.[¶](#section-3.2-2.12){.pilcrow}
:   

Opportunities for traffic engineering and traffic prioritization:
:   ICN provides the possibility to perform traffic engineering based on
    the name of desired content. This enables priority-based replication
    depending on the scope of a given message
    \[[Psaras2014](#Psaras2014){.xref}\]. In addition, as
    \[[Trossen2015](#Trossen2015){.xref}\], among others, have pointed
    out, the realization of ICN services and particularly of IP-based
    services on top of ICN provide further traffic engineering
    opportunities. The latter not only relate to the utilization of
    cached content, as outlined before, but to the ability to flexibly
    adapt to route changes (important in unreliable infrastructure, such
    as in disaster scenarios), mobility support without anchor points
    (again, important when parts of the infrastructure are likely to
    fail), and the inherent support for multicast and multihoming
    delivery.[¶](#section-3.2-2.14){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#researchgap}
::: {#section-3.3 .section}
### [3.3.](#section-3.3){.section-number .selfRef} [ICN as Starting Point vs. Existing DTN Solutions](#name-icn-as-starting-point-vs-ex){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-icn-as-starting-point-vs-ex}

There has been quite some work in the DTN (Delay-Tolerant Networking)
community on disaster communication (for instance, see the work and
discussions in the concluded IRTF DTN Research Group
\[[dtnrg](#dtnrg){.xref}\] and in the IETF DTN Working Group
\[[dtnwg](#dtnwg){.xref}\]). However, most DTN work lacks important
features, such as publish/subscribe (pub/sub) capabilities, caching,
multicast delivery, and message prioritization based on content types,
which are needed in the disaster scenarios we consider. One could add
such features to existing DTN protocols and solutions, and indeed
individual proposals for adding such features to DTN protocols have been
made (e.g., \[[Greifenberg2008](#Greifenberg2008){.xref}\] and
\[[Yoneki2007](#Yoneki2007){.xref}\] propose the use of a pub/sub-based
multicast distribution infrastructure for DTN-based opportunistic
networking environments).[¶](#section-3.3-1){.pilcrow}

However, arguably ICN \-- having these intrinsic properties (as also
outlined above) \-- makes a better starting point for building a
communication architecture that works well before and after a disaster.
For a disaster-enhanced ICN system, this would imply the following
advantages: a) ICN data mules would have built-in caches and can thus
return content for interests straight on, b) requests do not necessarily
need to be routed to a source (as with existing DTN protocols), instead
any data mule or end user can in principle respond to an interest, c)
built-in multicast delivery implies energy-efficient, large-scale
spreading of important information that is crucial in disaster
scenarios, and d) pub/sub extension for popular ICN implementations
exist \[[COPSS2011](#COPSS2011){.xref}\], which are very suitable for
efficient group communication in disasters and provide better
reliability, timeliness, and scalability, as compared to existing
pub/sub approaches in DTN \[[Greifenberg2008](#Greifenberg2008){.xref}\]
\[[Yoneki2007](#Yoneki2007){.xref}\] .[¶](#section-3.3-2){.pilcrow}

Finally, most DTN routing algorithms have been solely designed for
particular DTN scenarios. By extending ICN approaches for DTN-like
scenarios, one ensures that a solution works in regular (i.e.,
well-connected) settings just as well (which can be important in
reality, where a routing algorithm should work before and after a
disaster). It is thus reasonable to start with existing ICN approaches
and extend them with the necessary features needed in disaster
scenarios. In any case, solutions for disaster scenarios need a
combination of ICN-features and
DTN-capabilities.[¶](#section-3.3-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#usecases}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Use Cases and Requirements](#name-use-cases-and-requirements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-use-cases-and-requirements}

This section describes some use cases for the aforementioned disaster
scenario (as outlined in [Section 2](#disaster){.xref}) and discusses
the corresponding technical requirements for enabling these use
cases.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Delivering Messages to Relatives/Friends:

:   After a disaster strikes, citizens want to confirm to each other
    that they are safe. For instance, shortly after a large disaster
    (e.g., an earthquake or a tornado), people have moved to different
    refugee shelters. The mobile network is not fully recovered and is
    fragmented, but some base stations are functional. This use case
    imposes the following high-level requirements: a) people must be
    able to communicate with others in the same network fragment and b)
    people must be able to communicate with others that are located in
    different fragmented parts of the overall network. More concretely,
    the following requirements are needed to enable the use case: a) a
    mechanism for a scalable message forwarding scheme that dynamically
    adapts to changing conditions in disconnected networks, b) DTN-like
    mechanisms for getting information from one disconnected island to
    another disconnected island, c) source authentication and content
    integrity so that users can confirm that the messages they receive
    are indeed from their relatives or friends and have not been
    tampered with, and d) the support for contextual caching in order to
    provide the right information to the right set of affected people in
    the most efficient manner.[¶](#section-4-2.2.1){.pilcrow}

:   

Spreading Crucial Information to Citizens:
:   State authorities want to be able to convey important information
    (e.g., warnings or information on where to go or how to behave) to
    citizens. These kinds of information shall reach as many citizens as
    possible, i.e., crucial content from legal authorities shall
    potentially reach all users in time. The technical requirements that
    can be derived from this use case are a) source authentication and
    content integrity, such that citizens can confirm the correctness
    and authenticity of messages sent by authorities, b) mechanisms that
    guarantee the timeliness and loss-free delivery of such information,
    which may include techniques for prioritizing certain messages in
    the network depending on who sent them, and c) DTN-like mechanisms
    for getting information from disconnected island to another
    disconnected island.[¶](#section-4-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

It can be observed that different key use cases for disaster scenarios
imply overlapping and similar technical requirements for fulfilling
them. As discussed in [Section 3.2](#howicncanhelp){.xref}, ICN
approaches are envisioned to be very suitable for addressing these
requirements with actual technical solutions. In
\[[Robitzsch2015](#Robitzsch2015){.xref}\], a more elaborate set of
requirements is provided that addresses, among disaster scenarios, a
communication infrastructure for communities facing several geographic,
economic, and political challenges.[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#solutions}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [ICN-Based Research Approaches and Open Research Challenges](#name-icn-based-research-approach){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-icn-based-research-approach}

This section outlines some ICN-based research approaches that aim at
fulfilling the previously mentioned use cases and requirements ([Section
5.1](#suggested){.xref}). Most of these works provide proof-of-concept
type solutions, addressing singular challenges. Thus, several open
issues remain, which are summarized in [Section
5.2](#open){.xref}.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#suggested}
::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Suggested ICN-Based Research Approaches](#name-suggested-icn-based-researc){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-suggested-icn-based-researc}

The research community has investigated ICN-based solutions to address
the aforementioned challenges in disaster scenarios. Overall, the focus
is on delivery of messages and not real-time communication. While most
users would probably like to conduct real-time voice/video calls after a
disaster, in the extreme scenario we consider (with users being
scattered over different fragmented networks as can be the case in the
scenarios described in [Section 2](#disaster){.xref}), somewhat delayed
message delivery appears to be inevitable, and full-duplex real-time
communication seems infeasible to achieve (unless users are in close
proximity). Thus, the assumption is that \-- for a certain amount of
time at least (i.e., the initial period until the regular communication
infrastructure has been repaired) \-- users would need to live with
message delivery and publish/subscribe services but without real-time
communication. Note, however, that a) in principle, ICN can support
Voice over IP (VoIP) calls; thus, if users are in close proximity,
(duplex) voice communication via ICN is possible
\[[Gusev2015](#Gusev2015){.xref}\], and b) delayed message delivery can
very well include (recorded) voice
messages.[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

ICN \'data mules\':
:   To facilitate the exchange of messages between different network
    fragments, mobile entities can act as ICN \'data mules\', which are
    equipped with storage space and move around the disaster-stricken
    area gathering information to be disseminated. As the mules move
    around, they deliver messages to other individuals or points of
    attachment to different fragments of the network. These \'data
    mules\' could have a predetermined path (an ambulance going to and
    from a hospital), a fixed path (drone/robot assigned specifically to
    do so), or a completely random path (doctors moving from one camp to
    another). An example of a many-to-many communication service for
    fragmented networks based on ICN data mules has been proposed in
    \[[Tagami2016](#Tagami2016){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5.1-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Priority-dependent or popularity-dependent, name-based replication:
:   By allowing spatial and temporal scoping of named messages,
    priority-based replication depending on the scope of a given message
    is possible. Clearly, spreading information in disaster cases
    involves space and time factors that have to be taken into account
    as messages spread. A concrete approach for such scope-based
    prioritization of ICN messages in disasters, called \'NREP\', has
    been proposed \[[Psaras2014](#Psaras2014){.xref}\], where ICN
    messages have attributes, such as user-defined priority, space, and
    temporal validity. These attributes are then taken into account when
    prioritizing messages. In \[[Psaras2014](#Psaras2014){.xref}\],
    evaluations show how this approach can be applied to the use case
    \'Delivering Messages to Relatives/Friends\' described in [Section
    4](#usecases){.xref}. In \[[Seedorf2016](#Seedorf2016){.xref}\], a
    scheme is presented that enables estimating the popularity of ICN
    interest messages in a completely decentralized manner among data
    mules in a scenario with random, unpredictable movements of ICN data
    mules. The approach exploits the use of nonces associated with end
    user requests, common in most ICN architectures. It enables for a
    given ICN data mule to estimate the overall popularity (among end
    users) of a given ICN interest message. This enables data mules to
    optimize content dissemination with limited caching capabilities by
    prioritizing interests based on their
    popularity.[¶](#section-5.1-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Information resilience through decentralized forwarding:
:   In a dynamic or disruptive environment, such as the aftermath of a
    disaster, both users and content servers may dynamically join and
    leave the network (due to mobility or network fragmentation). Thus,
    users might attach to the network and request content when the
    network is fragmented and the corresponding content origin is not
    reachable. In order to increase information resilience, content
    cached both in in-network caches and in end-user devices should be
    exploited. A concrete approach for the exploitation of content
    cached in user devices is presented in
    \[[Sourlas2015](#Sourlas2015){.xref}\] . The proposal in
    \[[Sourlas2015](#Sourlas2015){.xref}\] includes enhancements to the
    Named Data Networking (NDN) router design, as well as an alternative
    Interest-forwarding scheme that enables users to retrieve cached
    content when the network is fragmented and the content origin is not
    reachable. Evaluations show that this approach is a valid tool for
    the retrieval of cached content in disruptive cases and can be
    applied to tackle the challenges presented in [Section
    3.1](#challenges){.xref} .[¶](#section-5.1-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Energy efficiency:
:   A large-scale disaster can cause a large-scale blackout; thus, a
    number of base stations (BSs) will be operated by their batteries.
    Capacities of such batteries are not large enough to provide
    cellular communication for several days after the disaster. In order
    to prolong the batteries\' life from one day to several days,
    different techniques need to be explored, including priority
    control, cell zooming, and collaborative upload. Cell zooming
    switches off some of the BSs because switching off is the only way
    to reduce power consumed at the idle time. In cell zooming, areas
    covered by such inactive BSs are covered by the active BSs.
    Collaborative communication is complementary to cell zooming and
    reduces power proportional to a load of a BS. The load represents
    cellular frequency resources. In collaborative communication, end
    devices delegate sending and receiving messages to and from a BS to
    a representative end device of which radio propagation quality is
    better. The design of an ICN-based publish/subscribe protocol that
    incorporates collaborative upload is ongoing work. In particular,
    the integration of collaborative upload techniques into the COPSS
    (Content Oriented Publish/Subscribe System) framework is envisioned
    \[[COPSS2011](#COPSS2011){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5.1-2.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Data-centric confidentiality and access control:
:   In ICN, the requested content is no longer associated to a trusted
    server or an endpoint location, but it can be retrieved from any
    network cache or a replica server. This calls for \'data-centric\'
    security, where security relies on information exclusively contained
    in the message itself, or if extra information provided by trusted
    entities is needed, this should be gathered through offline,
    asynchronous, and noninteractive communication, rather than from an
    explicit online interactive handshake with trusted servers. The
    ability to guarantee security without any online entities is
    particularly important in disaster scenarios with fragmented
    networks. One concrete cryptographic technique is
    \'Ciphertext-Policy Attribute Based Encryption (CP-ABE)\', allowing
    a party to encrypt a content specifying a policy that consists in a
    Boolean expression over attributes that must be satisfied by those
    who want to decrypt such content. Such encryption schemes tie
    confidentiality and access control to the transferred data, which
    can also be transmitted in an unsecured channel. These schemes
    enable the source to specify the set of nodes allowed to later on
    decrypt the content during the encryption
    process.[¶](#section-5.1-2.10){.pilcrow}
:   

Decentralized authentication of messages:
:   Self-certifying names provide the property that any entity in a
    distributed system can verify the binding between a corresponding
    public key and the self-certifying name without relying on a trusted
    third party. Self-certifying names thus provide a decentralized form
    of data origin authentication. However, self-certifying names lack a
    binding with a corresponding real-world identity. Given the
    decentralized nature of a disaster scenario, a PKI-based approach
    for binding self-certifying names with real-world identities is not
    feasible. Instead, a Web of Trust can be used to provide this
    binding. Not only are the cryptographic signatures used within a Web
    of Trust independent of any central authority, but there are also
    technical means for making the inherent trust relationships of a Web
    of Trust available to network entities in a decentralized,
    \'offline\' fashion, such that information received can be assessed
    based on these trust relationships. A concrete scheme for such an
    approach has been published in
    \[[Seedorf2014](#Seedorf2014){.xref}\], in which concrete examples
    for fulfilling the use case \'Delivering Messages to
    Relatives/Friends\' with this approach are also
    given.[¶](#section-5.1-2.12){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#open}
::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Open Research Challenges](#name-open-research-challenges){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-open-research-challenges}

The proposed solutions in [Section 5.1](#suggested){.xref} investigate
how ICN approaches can, in principle, address some of the outlined
challenges. However, several research challenges remain open and still
need to be addressed. The following (incomplete) list summarizes some
unanswered research questions and items that are being investigated by
researchers:[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Evaluating the proposed mechanisms (and their scalability) in
    realistic, large-scale testbeds with actual, mature implementations
    (compared to simulations or
    emulations).[¶](#section-5.2-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.1}
-   [To specify, for each mechanism suggested, what would be the user
    equipment required or necessary before and after a disaster and to
    what extent ICN should be deployed in the
    network.[¶](#section-5.2-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.2}
-   [How can DTN and ICN approaches be best used for an optimal overall
    combination of
    techniques?[¶](#section-5.2-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.3}
-   [How do data-centric encryption schemes scale and perform in
    large-scale, realistic
    evaluations?[¶](#section-5.2-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.4}
-   [Building and testing real (i.e., not early-stage prototypes) ICN
    data mules by means of implementation and integration with
    lower-layer hardware; conducting evaluations of decentralized
    forwarding schemes in real environments with these actual ICN data
    mules.[¶](#section-5.2-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.5}
-   [How to derive concrete, name-based policies allowing prioritized
    spreading of
    information.[¶](#section-5.2-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.6}
-   [Further investigating, developing, and verifying of mechanisms that
    address energy efficiency requirements for communication after a
    disaster.[¶](#section-5.2-2.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.7}
-   [How to properly disseminate authenticated object names to nodes
    (for decentralized integrity verification and authentication) before
    a disaster or how to retrieve new authenticated object names by
    nodes during a
    disaster.[¶](#section-5.2-2.8){.pilcrow}]{#section-5.2-2.8}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#security}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

This document does not define a new protocol (or protocol extension) or
a particular mechanism; therefore, it introduces no specific new
security considerations. General security considerations for ICN, which
also apply when using ICN techniques to communicate after a disaster,
are discussed in
\[[RFC7945](#RFC7945){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

The after-disaster communication scenario, which is the focus of this
document, raises particular attention to decentralized authentication,
content integrity, and trust as key research challenges (as outlined in
[Section 3.1](#challenges){.xref}). The corresponding use cases and
ICN-based research approaches discussed in this document thus imply
certain security requirements. In particular, data origin
authentication, data integrity, and access control are key requirements
for many use cases in the aftermath of a disaster (see [Section
4](#usecases){.xref}).[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

In principle, the kinds of disasters discussed in this document can
happen as a result of a natural disaster, accident, or human error.
However, intentional actions can also cause such a disaster (e.g., a
terrorist attack, as mentioned in [Section 2](#disaster){.xref}). In
this case (i.e., intentionally caused disasters by attackers), special
attention needs to be paid when re-enabling communications as temporary,
somewhat unreliable communications with potential limited security
features may be anticipated and abused by attackers (e.g., to circulate
false messages to cause further intentional chaos among the human
population, to leverage this less secure infrastructure to refine
targeting, or to track the responses of security/police forces).
Potential solutions on how to cope with intentionally caused disasters
by attackers and on how to enable a secure communications infrastructure
after an intentionally caused disaster are out of scope of this
document.[¶](#section-6-3){.pilcrow}

The use of data-centric security schemes, such as \'Ciphertext-Policy
Attribute Based Encryption\' (as mentioned in [Section
5.1](#suggested){.xref}), which encrypt the data itself (and not the
communication channel), in principle, allows for the transmission of
such encrypted data over an unsecured channel. However, metadata about
the encrypted data being retrieved still arises. Such metadata may
disclose sensitive information to a network-based attacker, even if such
an attacker cannot decrypt the content
itself.[¶](#section-6-4){.pilcrow}

This document has summarized research directions for addressing these
challenges and requirements, such as efforts in data-centric
confidentiality and access control, as well as recent works for
decentralized authentication of messages in a disaster-struck networking
infrastructure with nonfunctional routing links and limited
communication capabilities (see [Section
5](#solutions){.xref}).[¶](#section-6-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#conclusion}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Conclusion](#name-conclusion){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-conclusion}

This document has outlined some research directions for ICN with respect
to applying ICN approaches for coping with natural or human-generated,
large-scale disasters. The document has described high-level research
challenges for enabling communication after a disaster has happened, as
well as a general rationale why ICN approaches could be beneficial to
address these challenges. Further, concrete use cases have been
described and how these can be addressed with ICN-based approaches has
been discussed.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

Finally, this document provides an overview of examples of existing
ICN-based solutions that address the previously outlined research
challenges. These concrete solutions demonstrate that indeed the
communication challenges in the aftermath of a disaster can be addressed
with techniques that have ICN paradigms at their base, validating our
overall reasoning. However, further, more-detailed challenges exist, and
more research is necessary in all areas discussed: efficient content
distribution and routing in fragmented networks, traffic prioritization,
security, and energy efficiency. An incomplete, high-level list of such
open research challenges has concluded the
document.[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}

In order to deploy ICN-based solutions for disaster-aftermath
communication in actual mobile networks, standardized ICN baseline
protocols are a must. It is unlikely to expect all user equipment in a
large-scale mobile network to be from the same vendor. In this respect,
the work being done in the IRTF ICNRG is very useful as it works toward
standards for concrete ICN protocols that enable interoperability among
solutions from different vendors. These protocols \-- currently being
developed in the IRTF ICNRG as Experimental specifications in the IRTF
Stream \-- provide a good foundation for deploying ICN-based,
disaster-aftermath communication and thereby address key use cases that
arise in such situations (as outlined in this
document).[¶](#section-7-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#iana}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-9.1 .section}
### [9.1.](#section-9.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC5050\]
:   [Scott, K.]{.refAuthor}[ and S. Burleigh]{.refAuthor}, [\"Bundle
    Protocol Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5050]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5050]{.seriesInfo}, November 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5050>\>.
:   

\[RFC6920\]
:   [Farrell, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Kutscher, D.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Dannewitz, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Ohlman, B.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Keranen, A.]{.refAuthor}[, and P. Hallam-Baker]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Naming Things with Hashes\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6920]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC6920]{.seriesInfo}, April 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6920>\>.
:   

\[RFC7476\]
:   [Pentikousis, K., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Ohlman, B.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Corujo, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Boggia, G.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Tyson, G.]{.refAuthor}[, Davies, E.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Molinaro, A.]{.refAuthor}[, and S. Eum]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Information-Centric Networking: Baseline Scenarios\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 7476]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7476]{.seriesInfo}, March
    2015, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7476>\>.
:   

\[RFC7945\]
:   [Pentikousis, K., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Ohlman, B.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Davies, E.]{.refAuthor}[, Spirou, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and G.
    Boggia]{.refAuthor}, [\"Information-Centric Networking: Evaluation
    and Security Considerations\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7945]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC7945]{.seriesInfo}, September 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7945>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-9.2 .section}
### [9.2.](#section-9.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[cellbroadcast\]
:   [Wikipedia]{.refAuthor}, [\"Cell Broadcast\"]{.refTitle}, August
    2020,
    \<<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cell_Broadcast&oldid=972614007>\>.
:   

\[COPSS2011\]
:   [Chen, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Arumaithurai, M.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Jiao, L.]{.refAuthor}[, Fu, X.]{.refAuthor}[, and K.
    Ramakrishnan]{.refAuthor}, [\"COPSS: An Efficient Content Oriented
    Publish/Subscribe System\"]{.refTitle}, [Seventh ACM/IEEE Symposium
    on Architectures for Networking and Communications Systems
    (ANCS)]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1109/ANCS.2011.27]{.seriesInfo},
    October 2011, \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/ANCS.2011.27>\>.
:   

\[dtnrg\]
:   [IRTF]{.refAuthor}, [\"Delay-Tolerant Networking Research Group
    (DTNRG)\"]{.refTitle}, \<<https://irtf.org/dtnrg>\>.
:   

\[dtnwg\]
:   [IETF]{.refAuthor}, [\"Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networking
    (dtn)\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/dtn/about/>\>.
:   

\[Greifenberg2008\]
:   [Greifenberg, J.]{.refAuthor}[ and D. Kutscher]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Efficient Publish/Subscribe-Based Multicast for Opportunistic
    Networking with Self-Organized Resource Utilization\"]{.refTitle},
    [Advanced Information Networking and Applications -
    Workshops]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1109/WAINA.2008.255]{.seriesInfo},
    March 2008, \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/WAINA.2008.255>\>.
:   

\[Gusev2015\]
:   [Gusev, P.]{.refAuthor}[ and J. Burke]{.refAuthor}, [\"NDN-RTC:
    Real-Time Videoconferencing over Named Data
    Networking\"]{.refTitle}, [2nd ACM Conference on Information-Centric
    Networking (ICN)]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1145/2810156.2810176]{.seriesInfo}, September 2015,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1145/2810156.2810176>\>.
:   

\[Psaras2014\]
:   [Psaras, I.]{.refAuthor}[, Saino, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Arumaithurai, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Ramakrishnan, K.]{.refAuthor}[,
    and G. Pavlou]{.refAuthor}, [\"Name-based replication priorities in
    disaster cases\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE Conference on Computer
    Communications Workshops]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/INFCOMW.2014.6849271]{.seriesInfo}, April 2014,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/INFCOMW.2014.6849271>\>.
:   

\[Robitzsch2015\]
:   [Robitzsch, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Trossen, D.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Theodorou, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Barker, T.]{.refAuthor}[, and A.
    Sathiaseel]{.refAuthor}, [\"D2.1: Usage Scenarios and
    Requirements\"]{.refTitle}, [H2020 project RIFE, public
    deliverable]{.refContent}.
:   

\[Seedorf2014\]
:   [Seedorf, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Kutscher, D.]{.refAuthor}[, and F.
    Schneider]{.refAuthor}, [\"Decentralised binding of self-certifying
    names to real-world identities for assessment of third-party
    messages in fragmented mobile networks\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE
    Conference on Computer Communications Workshops]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/INFCOMW.2014.6849268]{.seriesInfo}, April 2014,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/INFCOMW.2014.6849268>\>.
:   

\[Seedorf2016\]
:   [Seedorf, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Kutscher, D.]{.refAuthor}[, and B.
    Gill]{.refAuthor}, [\"Decentralised Interest Counter Aggregation for
    ICN in Disaster Scenarios\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE Globecom
    Workshops]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/GLOCOMW.2016.7848869]{.seriesInfo}, December 2016,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/GLOCOMW.2016.7848869>\>.
:   

\[Sourlas2015\]
:   [Sourlas, V.]{.refAuthor}[, Tassiulas, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Psaras, I.]{.refAuthor}[, and G. Pavlou]{.refAuthor}, [\"Information
    resilience through user-assisted caching in disruptive
    Content-Centric Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [IFIP Networking
    Conference]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/IFIPNetworking.2015.7145301]{.seriesInfo}, May 2015,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/IFIPNetworking.2015.7145301>\>.
:   

\[Tagami2016\]
:   [Tagami, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Yagyu, T.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Sugiyama, K.]{.refAuthor}[, Arumaithurai, M.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Nakamura, K.]{.refAuthor}[, Hasegawa, T.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Asami, T.]{.refAuthor}[, and K. Ramakrishnan]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Name-based push/pull message dissemination for disaster message
    board\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE International Symposium on Local and
    Metropolitan Area Networks (LANMAN)]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/LANMAN.2016.7548855]{.seriesInfo}, June 2016,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/LANMAN.2016.7548855>\>.
:   

\[Trossen2015\]
:   [Trossen, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Reed, M.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Riihijärvi, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Georgiades, M.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Fotiou, N.]{.refAuthor}[, and G. Xylomenos]{.refAuthor}, [\"IP over
    ICN - The better IP?\"]{.refTitle}, [2European Conference on
    Networks and Communications (EuCNC)]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/EuCNC.2015.7194109]{.seriesInfo}, June 2015,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/EuCNC.2015.7194109>\>.
:   

\[Yoneki2007\]
:   [Yoneki, E.]{.refAuthor}[, Hui, P.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Chan, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and J. Crowcroft]{.refAuthor}, [\"A
    socio-aware overlay for publish/subscribe communication in delay
    tolerant networks\"]{.refTitle}, [Proceedings of the 10th ACM
    Symposium on Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation of Wireless and
    Mobile Systems]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1145/1298126.1298166]{.seriesInfo}, October 2007,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1145/1298126.1298166>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgment](#name-acknowledgment){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgment}

The authors would like to thank [Ioannis Psaras]{.contact-name} for
useful comments. Also, the authors are grateful to [Christopher
Wood]{.contact-name} and [Daniel Corujo]{.contact-name} for valuable
feedback and suggestions on concrete text for improving the document.
Further, the authors would like to thank [Joerg Ott]{.contact-name} and
[Dirk Trossen]{.contact-name} for valuable comments and input, in
particular, regarding existing work from the DTN community that is
highly related to the ICN approaches suggested in this document. Also,
[Akbar Rahman]{.contact-name} provided useful comments and suggestions,
in particular, regarding existing disaster warning mechanisms in
today\'s mobile phone networks.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}

This document has been supported by the GreenICN project (GreenICN:
Architecture and Applications of Green Information-Centric Networking),
a research project supported jointly by the European Commission under
its 7th Framework Program (contract no. 608518) and the National
Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT) in Japan
(contract no. 167). The views and conclusions contained herein are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing
the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of
the GreenICN project, the European Commission, or the NICT. More
information is available at the project website:
<http://www.greenicn.org/>.[¶](#section-appendix.a-2){.pilcrow}

This document has also been supported by the Coordination Support Action
entitled \'Supporting European Experts Presence in International
Standardisation Activities in ICT\'
([StandICT.eu](https://standict.eu/)) funded by the European Commission
under the Horizon 2020 Programme with Grant Agreement no. 780439. The
views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official
policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the European
Commission.[¶](#section-appendix.a-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jan Seedorf]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[HFT Stuttgart - Univ. of Applied Sciences]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Schellingstrasse 24]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[70174]{.postal-code} [Stuttgart]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Germany]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+49 711 8926 2801](tel:+49%20711%208926%202801){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <jan.seedorf@hft-stuttgart.de>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mayutan Arumaithurai]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[University of Göttingen]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Goldschmidt Str. 7]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[37077]{.postal-code} [Göttingen ]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Germany]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+49 551 39 172046](tel:+49%20551%2039%20172046){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <arumaithurai@informatik.uni-goettingen.de>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Atsushi Tagami]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[KDDI Research Inc.]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[2-1-15 Ohara, Fujimino]{.street-address}, [Saitama]{.region}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[356-85025]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Japan]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+81 49 278 73651](tel:+81%2049%20278%2073651){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <tagami@kddi-research.jp>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[K. K. Ramakrishnan]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[University of California]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Riverside]{.locality}, [CA]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <kkrama@ucr.edu>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Nicola Blefari Melazzi]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[University Tor Vergata]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Via del Politecnico, 1]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[00133]{.postal-code} [Roma]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Italy]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+39 06 7259 7501](tel:+39%2006%207259%207501){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <blefari@uniroma2.it>
:::
:::
:::
