  RFC 8888         Congestion Control Feedback in RTCP   January 2021
  ---------------- ------------------------------------- --------------
  Sarker, et al.   Standards Track                       \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8888](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8888){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   January 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    Z. Sarker
    :::

    ::: org
    Ericsson AB
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    C. Perkins
    :::

    ::: org
    University of Glasgow
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    V. Singh
    :::

    ::: org
    callstats.io
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Ramalho
    :::

    ::: org
    AcousticComms
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8888 {#rfcnum}

# RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) Feedback for Congestion Control {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

An effective RTP congestion control algorithm requires more fine-grained
feedback on packet loss, timing, and Explicit Congestion Notification
(ECN) marks than is provided by the standard RTP Control Protocol (RTCP)
Sender Report (SR) and Receiver Report (RR) packets. This document
describes an RTCP feedback message intended to enable congestion control
for interactive real-time traffic using RTP. The feedback message is
designed for use with a sender-based congestion control algorithm, in
which the receiver of an RTP flow sends back to the sender RTCP feedback
packets containing the information the sender needs to perform
congestion control.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8888>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [RTCP Feedback for Congestion
    Control](#name-rtcp-feedback-for-congestio){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [RTCP Congestion Control Feedback
        Report](#name-rtcp-congestion-control-fee){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Feedback Frequency and
    Overhead](#name-feedback-frequency-and-over){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Response to Loss of Feedback
    Packets](#name-response-to-loss-of-feedbac){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [SDP
    Signaling](#name-sdp-signaling){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Relationship to RFC
    6679](#name-relationship-to-rfc-6679){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Design
    Rationale](#name-design-rationale){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [11](#section-11){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.1}
        [11.1](#section-11.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.2}
        [11.2](#section-11.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.12.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.13}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.13.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

For interactive real-time traffic, such as video conferencing flows, the
typical protocol choice is the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP)
\[[RFC3550](#RFC3550){.xref}\] running over the User Datagram Protocol
(UDP). RTP does not provide any guarantee of Quality of Service (QoS),
reliability, or timely delivery, and expects the underlying transport
protocol to do so. UDP alone certainly does not meet that expectation.
However, the RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) \[[RFC3550](#RFC3550){.xref}\]
provides a mechanism by which the receiver of an RTP flow can
periodically send transport and media quality metrics to the sender of
that RTP flow. This information can be used by the sender to perform
congestion control. In the absence of standardized messages for this
purpose, designers of congestion control algorithms have developed
proprietary RTCP messages that convey only those parameters needed for
their respective designs. As a direct result, the different congestion
control designs are not interoperable. To enable algorithm evolution as
well as interoperability across designs (e.g., different rate adaptation
algorithms), it is highly desirable to have a generic congestion control
feedback format.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

To help achieve interoperability for unicast RTP congestion control,
this memo specifies a common RTCP feedback packet format that can be
used by Network-Assisted Dynamic Adaptation (NADA)
\[[RFC8698](#RFC8698){.xref}\], Self-Clocked Rate Adaptation for
Multimedia (SCReAM) \[[RFC8298](#RFC8298){.xref}\], Google Congestion
Control \[[Google-GCC](#Google-GCC){.xref}\], and Shared Bottleneck
Detection \[[RFC8382](#RFC8382){.xref}\], and, hopefully, also by future
RTP congestion control algorithms.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

In addition, the terminology defined in \[[RFC3550](#RFC3550){.xref}\],
\[[RFC4585](#RFC4585){.xref}\], and \[[RFC5506](#RFC5506){.xref}\]
applies.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#feedback_message}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [RTCP Feedback for Congestion Control](#name-rtcp-feedback-for-congestio){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-rtcp-feedback-for-congestio}

Based on an analysis of NADA \[[RFC8698](#RFC8698){.xref}\], SCReAM
\[[RFC8298](#RFC8298){.xref}\], Google Congestion Control
\[[Google-GCC](#Google-GCC){.xref}\], and Shared Bottleneck Detection
\[[RFC8382](#RFC8382){.xref}\], the following per-RTP packet congestion
control feedback information has been determined to be
necessary:[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

RTP Sequence Number:
:   The receiver of an RTP flow needs to feed the sequence numbers of
    the received RTP packets back to the sender, so the sender can
    determine which packets were received and which were lost. Packet
    loss is used as an indication of congestion by many congestion
    control algorithms.[¶](#section-3-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Packet Arrival Time:
:   The receiver of an RTP flow needs to feed the arrival time of each
    RTP packet back to the sender. Packet delay and/or delay variation
    (jitter) is used as a congestion signal by some congestion control
    algorithms.[¶](#section-3-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Packet Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) Marking:
:   If ECN \[[RFC3168](#RFC3168){.xref}\] \[[RFC6679](#RFC6679){.xref}\]
    is used, it is necessary to feed back the 2-bit ECN mark in received
    RTP packets, indicating for each RTP packet whether it is marked
    not-ECT, ECT(0), ECT(1), or ECN Congestion Experienced (ECN-CE).
    (\"ECT\" stands for \"ECN-Capable Transport\".) If the path used by
    the RTP traffic is ECN capable, the sender can use ECN-CE marking
    information as a congestion control
    signal.[¶](#section-3-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Every RTP flow is identified by its Synchronization Source (SSRC)
identifier. Accordingly, the RTCP feedback format needs to group its
reports by SSRC, sending one report block per received
SSRC.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

As a practical matter, we note that host operating system (OS) process
interruptions can occur at inopportune times. Accordingly, recording RTP
packet send times at the sender, and the corresponding RTP packet
arrival times at the receiver, needs to be done with deliberate care.
This is because the time duration of host OS interruptions can be
significant relative to the precision desired in the one-way delay
estimates. Specifically, the send time needs to be recorded at the last
opportunity prior to transmitting the RTP packet at the sender, and the
arrival time at the receiver needs to be recorded at the earliest
available opportunity.[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}

::: {#sec_ccfb}
::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [RTCP Congestion Control Feedback Report](#name-rtcp-congestion-control-fee){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-rtcp-congestion-control-fee}

Congestion control feedback can be sent as part of a regular scheduled
RTCP report or in an RTP/AVPF early feedback packet. If sent as early
feedback, congestion control feedback [MAY]{.bcp14} be sent in a
non-compound RTCP packet \[[RFC5506](#RFC5506){.xref}\] if the RTP/AVPF
profile \[[RFC4585](#RFC4585){.xref}\] or the RTP/SAVPF profile
\[[RFC5124](#RFC5124){.xref}\] is used.[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

Irrespective of how it is transported, the congestion control feedback
is sent as a Transport-Layer Feedback Message (RTCP packet type 205).
The format of this RTCP packet is shown in [Figure
1](#rtcp-packet){.xref}:[¶](#section-3.1-2){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-rtcp-congestion-control-feed}

::: {#rtcp-packet}
::: {#section-3.1-3.1 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
       0                   1                   2                   3
       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |V=2|P| FMT=11  |   PT = 205    |          length               |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |                 SSRC of RTCP packet sender                    |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |                   SSRC of 1st RTP Stream                      |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |          begin_seq            |          num_reports          |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |R|ECN|  Arrival time offset    | ...                           .
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      .                                                               .
      .                                                               .
      .                                                               .
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |                   SSRC of nth RTP Stream                      |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |          begin_seq            |          num_reports          |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |R|ECN|  Arrival time offset    | ...                           |
      .                                                               .
      .                                                               .
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |                 Report Timestamp (32 bits)                    |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [RTCP Congestion Control Feedback
Packet Format](#name-rtcp-congestion-control-feed){.selfRef}
:::

The first 8 octets comprise a standard RTCP header, with PT=205 and
FMT=11 indicating that this is a congestion control feedback packet, and
with the SSRC set to that of the sender of the RTCP
packet.[¶](#section-3.1-4){.pilcrow}

[Section
6.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4585#section-6.1){.relref} of
\[[RFC4585](#RFC4585){.xref}\] requires the RTCP header to be followed
by the SSRC of the RTP flow being reported upon. Accordingly, the RTCP
header is followed by a report block for each SSRC from which RTP
packets have been received, followed by a Report
Timestamp.[¶](#section-3.1-5){.pilcrow}

Each report block begins with the SSRC of the received RTP stream on
which it is reporting. Following this, the report block contains a
16-bit packet metric block for each RTP packet that has a sequence
number in the range begin_seq to begin_seq+num_reports inclusive
(calculated using arithmetic modulo 65536 to account for possible
sequence number wrap-around). If the number of 16-bit packet metric
blocks included in the report block is not a multiple of two, then 16
bits of zero padding [MUST]{.bcp14} be added after the last packet
metric block, to align the end of the packet metric blocks with the next
32-bit boundary. The value of num_reports [MAY]{.bcp14} be 0, indicating
that there are no packet metric blocks included for that SSRC. Each
report block [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} include more than 16384 packet metric
blocks (i.e., it [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} report on more than one quarter of
the sequence number space in a single
report).[¶](#section-3.1-6){.pilcrow}

The contents of each 16-bit packet metric block comprise the R, ECN, and
ATO fields as follows:[¶](#section-3.1-7){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Received (R, 1 bit):
:   A boolean that indicates whether the packet was received.  0
    indicates that the packet was not yet received and the subsequent 15
    bits (ECN and ATO) in this 16-bit packet metric block are also set
    to 0 and [MUST]{.bcp14} be ignored. 1 indicates that the packet was
    received and the subsequent bits in the block need to be
    parsed.[¶](#section-3.1-8.2){.pilcrow}
:   

ECN (2 bits):
:   The echoed ECN mark of the packet. These bits are set to 00 if not
    received or if ECN is not used.[¶](#section-3.1-8.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Arrival time offset (ATO, 13 bits):
:   The arrival time of the RTP packet at the receiver, as an offset
    before the time represented by the Report Timestamp (RTS) field of
    this RTCP congestion control feedback report. The ATO field is in
    units of 1/1024 seconds (this unit is chosen to give exact offsets
    from the RTS field) so, for example, an ATO value of 512 indicates
    that the corresponding RTP packet arrived exactly half a second
    before the time instant represented by the RTS field. If the
    measured value is greater than 8189/1024 seconds (the value that
    would be coded as 0x1FFD), the value 0x1FFE [MUST]{.bcp14} be
    reported to indicate an over-range measurement. If the measurement
    is unavailable or if the arrival time of the RTP packet is after the
    time represented by the RTS field, then an ATO value of 0x1FFF
    [MUST]{.bcp14} be reported for the
    packet.[¶](#section-3.1-8.6){.pilcrow}
:   

The RTCP congestion control feedback report packet concludes with the
Report Timestamp field (RTS, 32 bits). This denotes the time instant on
which this packet is reporting and is the instant from which the arrival
time offset values are calculated. The value of the RTS field is derived
from the same clock used to generate the NTP timestamp field in RTCP
Sender Report (SR) packets. It is formatted as the middle 32 bits of an
NTP format timestamp, as described in [Section
4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3550#section-4){.relref} of
\[[RFC3550](#RFC3550){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.1-9){.pilcrow}

RTCP Congestion Control Feedback Packets [SHOULD]{.bcp14} include a
report block for every active SSRC. The sequence number ranges reported
on in consecutive reports for a given SSRC will generally be contiguous,
but overlapping reports [MAY]{.bcp14} be sent (and need to be sent in
cases where RTP packet reordering occurs across the boundary between
consecutive reports). If an RTP packet was reported as received in one
report, that packet [MUST]{.bcp14} also be reported as received in any
overlapping reports sent later that cover its sequence number range. If
feedback reports covering overlapping sequence number ranges are sent,
information in later feedback reports may update any data sent in
previous reports for RTP packets included in both feedback
reports.[¶](#section-3.1-10){.pilcrow}

RTCP Congestion Control Feedback Packets can be large if they are sent
infrequently relative to the number of RTP data packets. If an RTCP
Congestion Control Feedback Packet is too large to fit within the path
MTU, its sender [SHOULD]{.bcp14} split it into multiple feedback
packets. The RTCP reporting interval [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be chosen such
that feedback packets are sent often enough that they are small enough
to fit within the path MTU.
(\[[RTCP-Multimedia-Feedback](#I-D.ietf-rmcat-rtp-cc-feedback){.xref}\]
discusses how to choose the reporting interval; specifications for RTP
congestion control algorithms can also provide
guidance.)[¶](#section-3.1-11){.pilcrow}

If duplicate copies of a particular RTP packet are received, then the
arrival time of the first copy to arrive [MUST]{.bcp14} be reported. If
any of the copies of the duplicated packet are ECN-CE marked, then an
ECN-CE mark [MUST]{.bcp14} be reported for that packet; otherwise, the
ECN mark of the first copy to arrive is
reported.[¶](#section-3.1-12){.pilcrow}

If no packets are received from an SSRC in a reporting interval, a
report block [MAY]{.bcp14} be sent with begin_seq set to the highest
sequence number previously received from that SSRC and num_reports set
to 0 (or the report can simply be omitted). The corresponding Sender
Report / Receiver Report (SR/RR) packet will have a non-increased
extended highest sequence number received field that will inform the
sender that no packets have been received, but it can ease processing to
have that information available in the congestion control feedback
reports too.[¶](#section-3.1-13){.pilcrow}

A report block indicating that certain RTP packets were lost is not to
be interpreted as a request to retransmit the lost packets. The receiver
of such a report might choose to retransmit such packets, provided a
retransmission payload format has been negotiated, but there is no
requirement that it do so.[¶](#section-3.1-14){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Feedback Frequency and Overhead](#name-feedback-frequency-and-over){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-feedback-frequency-and-over}

There is a trade-off between speed and accuracy of reporting, and the
overhead of the reports.
\[[RTCP-Multimedia-Feedback](#I-D.ietf-rmcat-rtp-cc-feedback){.xref}\]
discusses this trade-off, suggests desirable RTCP feedback rates, and
provides guidance on how to configure, for example, the RTCP bandwidth
fraction to make appropriate use of the reporting block described in
this memo. Specifications for RTP congestion control algorithms can also
provide guidance.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

It is generally understood that congestion control algorithms work
better with more frequent feedback. However, RTCP bandwidth and
transmission rules put some upper limits on how frequently the RTCP
feedback messages can be sent from an RTP receiver to the RTP sender. In
many cases, sending feedback once per frame is an upper bound before the
reporting overhead becomes excessive, although this will depend on the
media rate and more frequent feedback might be needed with high-rate
media flows
\[[RTCP-Multimedia-Feedback](#I-D.ietf-rmcat-rtp-cc-feedback){.xref}\].
Analysis \[[feedback-requirements](#feedback-requirements){.xref}\] has
also shown that some candidate congestion control algorithms can operate
with less frequent feedback, using a feedback interval range of 50-200
ms. Applications need to negotiate an appropriate congestion control
feedback interval at session setup time, based on the choice of
congestion control algorithm, the expected media bitrate, and the
acceptable feedback overhead.[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Response to Loss of Feedback Packets](#name-response-to-loss-of-feedbac){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-response-to-loss-of-feedbac}

Like all RTCP packets, RTCP Congestion Control Feedback Packets might be
lost. All RTP congestion control algorithms [MUST]{.bcp14} specify how
they respond to the loss of feedback packets.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

RTCP packets do not contain a sequence number, so loss of feedback
packets has to be inferred based on the time since the last feedback
packet. If only a single congestion control feedback packet is lost, an
appropriate response is to assume that the level of congestion has
remained roughly the same as the previous report. However, if multiple
consecutive congestion control feedback packets are lost, then the media
sender [SHOULD]{.bcp14} rapidly reduce its sending rate as this likely
indicates a path failure. The RTP circuit breaker specification
\[[RFC8083](#RFC8083){.xref}\] provides further
guidance.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [SDP Signaling](#name-sdp-signaling){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-sdp-signaling}

A new \"ack\" feedback parameter, \"ccfb\", is defined for use with the
\"a=rtcp-fb:\" Session Description Protocol (SDP) extension to indicate
the use of the RTP Congestion Control Feedback Packet format defined in
[Section 3](#feedback_message){.xref}. The ABNF definition
\[[RFC5234](#RFC5234){.xref}\] of this SDP parameter extension
is:[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-6-2}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-abnf}
        rtcp-fb-ack-param = <See Section 4.2 of [RFC4585]>
        rtcp-fb-ack-param =/ ccfb-par
        ccfb-par          = SP "ccfb"
```

[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}
:::

The payload type used with \"ccfb\" feedback [MUST]{.bcp14} be the
wildcard type (\"\*\"). This implies that the congestion control
feedback is sent for all payload types in use in the session, including
any Forward Error Correction (FEC) and retransmission payload types. An
example of the resulting SDP attribute is:[¶](#section-6-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-6-4}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-sdp}
        a=rtcp-fb:* ack ccfb
```

[¶](#section-6-4){.pilcrow}
:::

The offer/answer rules for these SDP feedback parameters are specified
in [Section
4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4585#section-4.2){.relref} of the
RTP/AVPF profile
\[[RFC4585](#RFC4585){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-5){.pilcrow}

An SDP offer might indicate support for both the congestion control
feedback mechanism specified in this memo and one or more alternative
congestion control feedback mechanisms that offer substantially the same
semantics. In this case, the answering party [SHOULD]{.bcp14} include
only one of the offered congestion control feedback mechanisms in its
answer. If a subsequent offer containing the same set of congestion
control feedback mechanisms is received, the generated answer
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} choose the same congestion control feedback mechanism
as in the original answer where possible.[¶](#section-6-6){.pilcrow}

When the SDP BUNDLE extension \[[RFC8843](#RFC8843){.xref}\] is used for
multiplexing, the \"a=rtcp-fb:\" attribute has multiplexing category
IDENTICAL-PER-PT
\[[RFC8859](#RFC8859){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-7){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Relationship to RFC 6679](#name-relationship-to-rfc-6679){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-relationship-to-rfc-6679}

The use of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) with RTP is described
in \[[RFC6679](#RFC6679){.xref}\], which specifies how to negotiate the
use of ECN with RTP and defines an RTCP ECN Feedback Packet to carry ECN
feedback reports. It uses an SDP \"a=ecn-capable-rtp:\" attribute to
negotiate the use of ECN, and the \"a=rtcp-fb:\" attribute with the
\"nack\" parameter \"ecn\" to negotiate the use of RTCP ECN Feedback
Packets.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

The RTCP ECN Feedback Packet is not useful when ECN is used with the RTP
Congestion Control Feedback Packet defined in this memo, since it
provides duplicate information. When congestion control feedback is to
be used with RTP and ECN, the SDP offer generated [MUST]{.bcp14} include
an \"a=ecn-capable-rtp:\" attribute to negotiate ECN support, along with
an \"a=rtcp-fb:\" attribute with the \"ack\" parameter \"ccfb\" to
indicate that the RTP Congestion Control Feedback Packet can be used.
The \"a=rtcp-fb:\" attribute [MAY]{.bcp14} also include the \"nack\"
parameter \"ecn\" to indicate that the RTCP ECN Feedback Packet is also
supported. If an SDP offer signals support for both RTP Congestion
Control Feedback Packets and the RTCP ECN Feedback Packet, the answering
party [SHOULD]{.bcp14} signal support for one, but not both, formats in
its SDP answer to avoid sending duplicate
feedback.[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}

When using ECN with RTP, the guidelines in [Section
7.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6679#section-7.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC6679](#RFC6679){.xref}\] [MUST]{.bcp14} be followed to initiate
the use of ECN in an RTP session. The guidelines in [Section
7.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6679#section-7.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC6679](#RFC6679){.xref}\] regarding the ongoing use of ECN within
an RTP session [MUST]{.bcp14} also be followed, with the exception that
feedback is sent using the RTCP Congestion Control Feedback Packets
described in this memo rather than using RTP ECN Feedback Packets.
Similarly, the guidance in [Section
7.4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6679#section-7.4){.relref} of
\[[RFC6679](#RFC6679){.xref}\] related to detecting failures
[MUST]{.bcp14} be followed, with the exception that the necessary
information is retrieved from the RTCP Congestion Control Feedback
Packets rather than from RTP ECN Feedback
Packets.[¶](#section-7-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Design Rationale](#name-design-rationale){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-design-rationale}

The primary function of RTCP SR/RR packets is to report statistics on
the reception of RTP packets. The reception report blocks sent in these
packets contain information about observed jitter, fractional packet
loss, and cumulative packet loss. It was intended that this information
could be used to support congestion control algorithms, but experience
has shown that it is not sufficient for that purpose. An efficient
congestion control algorithm requires more fine-grained information on
per-packet reception quality than is provided by SR/RR packets to react
effectively. The feedback format defined in this memo provides such
fine-grained feedback.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

Several other RTCP extensions also provide more detailed feedback than
SR/RR packets:[¶](#section-8-2){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

TMMBR:
:   The codec control messages for the RTP/AVPF profile
    \[[RFC5104](#RFC5104){.xref}\] include a Temporary Maximum Media
    Stream Bit Rate Request (TMMBR) message. This is used to convey a
    temporary maximum bitrate limitation from a receiver of RTP packets
    to their sender. Even though it was not designed to replace
    congestion control, TMMBR has been used as a means to do
    receiver-based congestion control where the session bandwidth is
    high enough to send frequent TMMBR messages, especially when used
    with non-compound RTCP packets \[[RFC5506](#RFC5506){.xref}\]. This
    approach requires the receiver of the RTP packets to monitor their
    reception, determine the level of congestion, and recommend a
    maximum bitrate suitable for current available bandwidth on the
    path; it also assumes that the RTP sender can⁠/will respect that
    bitrate. This is the opposite of the sender-based congestion control
    approach suggested in this memo, so TMMBR cannot be used to convey
    the information needed for sender-based congestion control. TMMBR
    could, however, be viewed as a complementary mechanism that can
    inform the sender of the receiver\'s current view of an acceptable
    maximum bitrate. Mechanisms that convey the receiver\'s estimate of
    the maximum available bitrate provide similar
    feedback.[¶](#section-8-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

RTCP Extended Reports (XRs):
:   Numerous RTCP XR blocks have been defined to report details of
    packet loss, arrival times \[[RFC3611](#RFC3611){.xref}\], delay
    \[[RFC6843](#RFC6843){.xref}\], and ECN marking
    \[[RFC6679](#RFC6679){.xref}\]. It is possible to combine several
    such XR blocks into a compound RTCP packet, to report the detailed
    loss, arrival time, and ECN marking information needed for effective
    sender-based congestion control. However, the result has high
    overhead in terms of both bandwidth and complexity, due to the need
    to stack multiple reports.[¶](#section-8-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Transport-wide Congestion Control:
:   The format defined in this memo provides individual feedback on each
    SSRC. An alternative is to add a header extension to each RTP
    packet, containing a single, transport-wide, packet sequence number,
    then have the receiver send RTCP reports giving feedback on these
    additional sequence numbers
    \[[RTP-Ext-for-CC](#I-D.holmer-rmcat-transport-wide-cc-extensions){.xref}\].
    Such an approach increases the size of each RTP packet by 8 octets,
    due to the header extension, but reduces the size of the RTCP
    feedback packets, and can simplify the rate calculation at the
    sender if it maintains a single rate limit that applies to all RTP
    packets sent, irrespective of their SSRC. Equally, the use of
    transport-wide feedback makes it more difficult to adapt the sending
    rate, or respond to lost packets, based on the reception and/or loss
    patterns observed on a per-SSRC basis (for example, to perform
    differential rate control and repair for audio and video flows,
    based on knowledge of what packets from each flow were lost).
    Transport-wide feedback is also a less natural fit with the wider
    RTP framework, which makes extensive use of per-SSRC sequence
    numbers and feedback.[¶](#section-8-3.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Considering these issues, we believe it appropriate to design a new RTCP
feedback mechanism to convey information for sender-based congestion
control algorithms. The new congestion control feedback RTCP packet
described in [Section 3](#feedback_message){.xref} provides such a
mechanism.[¶](#section-8-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

The IANA has registered one new RTP/AVPF Transport-Layer Feedback
Message in the \"FMT Values for RTPFB Payload Types\" table
\[[RFC4585](#RFC4585){.xref}\] as defined in [Section
3.1](#sec_ccfb){.xref}:[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Name:
:   CCFB[¶](#section-9-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Long name:
:   RTP Congestion Control Feedback[¶](#section-9-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Value:
:   11[¶](#section-9-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Reference:
:   RFC 8888[¶](#section-9-2.8){.pilcrow}
:   

The IANA has also registered one new SDP \"rtcp-fb\" attribute \"ack\"
parameter, \"ccfb\", in the SDP \'\"ack\" and \"nack\" Attribute
Values\' registry:[¶](#section-9-3){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Value name:
:   ccfb[¶](#section-9-4.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Long name:
:   Congestion Control Feedback[¶](#section-9-4.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Usable with:
:   ack[¶](#section-9-4.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Mux:
:   IDENTICAL-PER-PT[¶](#section-9-4.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Reference:
:   RFC 8888[¶](#section-9-4.10){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

The security considerations of the RTP specification
\[[RFC3550](#RFC3550){.xref}\], the applicable RTP profile (e.g.,
\[[RFC3551](#RFC3551){.xref}\], \[[RFC3711](#RFC3711){.xref}\], or
\[[RFC4585](#RFC4585){.xref}\]), and the RTP congestion control
algorithm being used (e.g., \[[RFC8698](#RFC8698){.xref}\],
\[[RFC8298](#RFC8298){.xref}\], \[[Google-GCC](#Google-GCC){.xref}\], or
\[[RFC8382](#RFC8382){.xref}\]) apply.[¶](#section-10-1){.pilcrow}

A receiver that intentionally generates inaccurate RTCP congestion
control feedback reports might be able to trick the sender into sending
at a greater rate than the path can support, thereby causing congestion
on the path. This scenario will negatively impact the quality of
experience of that receiver, potentially causing both denial of service
to other traffic sharing the path and excessively increased resource
usage at the media sender. Since RTP is an unreliable transport, a
sender can intentionally drop a packet, leaving a gap in the RTP
sequence number space without causing serious harm, to check that the
receiver is correctly reporting losses. (This needs to be done with care
and some awareness of the media data being sent, to limit impact on the
user experience.)[¶](#section-10-2){.pilcrow}

An on-path attacker that can modify RTCP Congestion Control Feedback
Packets can change the reports to trick the sender into sending at
either an excessively high or excessively low rate, leading to denial of
service. The secure RTCP profile \[[RFC3711](#RFC3711){.xref}\] can be
used to authenticate RTCP packets to protect against this
attack.[¶](#section-10-3){.pilcrow}

An off-path attacker that can spoof RTCP Congestion Control Feedback
Packets can similarly trick a sender into sending at an incorrect rate,
leading to denial of service. This attack is difficult, since the
attacker needs to guess the SSRC and sequence number in addition to the
destination transport address. As with on-path attacks, the secure RTCP
profile \[[RFC3711](#RFC3711){.xref}\] can be used to authenticate RTCP
packets to protect against this attack.[¶](#section-10-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-11 .section}
## [11.](#section-11){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-11.1 .section}
### [11.1.](#section-11.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC3168\]
:   [Ramakrishnan, K.]{.refAuthor}[, Floyd, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and D.
    Black]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Addition of Explicit Congestion
    Notification (ECN) to IP\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3168]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC3168]{.seriesInfo}, September 2001,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3168>\>.
:   

\[RFC3550\]
:   [Schulzrinne, H.]{.refAuthor}[, Casner, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Frederick, R.]{.refAuthor}[, and V. Jacobson]{.refAuthor}, [\"RTP: A
    Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    64]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 3550]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3550]{.seriesInfo}, July 2003,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3550>\>.
:   

\[RFC3551\]
:   [Schulzrinne, H.]{.refAuthor}[ and S. Casner]{.refAuthor}, [\"RTP
    Profile for Audio and Video Conferences with Minimal
    Control\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 65]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    3551]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC3551]{.seriesInfo}, July 2003,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3551>\>.
:   

\[RFC3711\]
:   [Baugher, M.]{.refAuthor}[, McGrew, D.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Naslund, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Carrara, E.]{.refAuthor}[, and K.
    Norrman]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Secure Real-time Transport Protocol
    (SRTP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3711]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3711]{.seriesInfo}, March 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3711>\>.
:   

\[RFC4585\]
:   [Ott, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Wenger, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Sato, N.]{.refAuthor}[, Burmeister, C.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Rey]{.refAuthor}, [\"Extended RTP Profile for Real-time Transport
    Control Protocol (RTCP)-Based Feedback (RTP/AVPF)\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 4585]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4585]{.seriesInfo}, July
    2006, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4585>\>.
:   

\[RFC5124\]
:   [Ott, J.]{.refAuthor}[ and E. Carrara]{.refAuthor}, [\"Extended
    Secure RTP Profile for Real-time Transport Control Protocol
    (RTCP)-Based Feedback (RTP/SAVPF)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5124]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5124]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2008, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5124>\>.
:   

\[RFC5234\]
:   [Crocker, D., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and P. Overell]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications: ABNF\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    68]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 5234]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5234]{.seriesInfo}, January 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5234>\>.
:   

\[RFC5506\]
:   [Johansson, I.]{.refAuthor}[ and M. Westerlund]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Support for Reduced-Size Real-Time Transport Control Protocol
    (RTCP): Opportunities and Consequences\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5506]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5506]{.seriesInfo}, April 2009,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5506>\>.
:   

\[RFC6679\]
:   [Westerlund, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Johansson, I.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Perkins, C.]{.refAuthor}[, O\'Hanlon, P.]{.refAuthor}[, and K.
    Carlberg]{.refAuthor}, [\"Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) for
    RTP over UDP\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6679]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6679]{.seriesInfo}, August 2012,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6679>\>.
:   

\[RFC8083\]
:   [Perkins, C.]{.refAuthor}[ and V. Singh]{.refAuthor}, [\"Multimedia
    Congestion Control: Circuit Breakers for Unicast RTP
    Sessions\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8083]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8083]{.seriesInfo}, March 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8083>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8843\]
:   [Holmberg, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Alvestrand, H.]{.refAuthor}[, and C.
    Jennings]{.refAuthor}, [\"Negotiating Media Multiplexing Using the
    Session Description Protocol (SDP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8843]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8843]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2021, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8843>\>.
:   

\[RFC8859\]
:   [Nandakumar, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Framework for Session Description
    Protocol (SDP) Attributes When Multiplexing\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8859]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8859]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2021, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8859>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-11.2 .section}
### [11.2.](#section-11.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[feedback-requirements\]
:   [\"RMCAT Feedback Requirements\"]{.refTitle}, [IETF
    95]{.refContent}, April 2016,
    \<<https://www.ietf.org/proceedings/95/slides/slides-95-rmcat-1.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Google-GCC\]
:   [Holmer, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Lundin, H.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Carlucci, G.]{.refAuthor}[, De Cicco, L.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Mascolo]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Google Congestion Control Algorithm for
    Real-Time Communication\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-rmcat-gcc-02]{.seriesInfo}, 8 July 2016,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-rmcat-gcc-02>\>.
:   

\[RFC3611\]
:   [Friedman, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Caceres, R., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[,
    and A. Clark, Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"RTP Control Protocol Extended
    Reports (RTCP XR)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3611]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3611]{.seriesInfo}, November 2003,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3611>\>.
:   

\[RFC5104\]
:   [Wenger, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Chandra, U.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Westerlund, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and B. Burman]{.refAuthor}, [\"Codec
    Control Messages in the RTP Audio-Visual Profile with Feedback
    (AVPF)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5104]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5104]{.seriesInfo}, February 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5104>\>.
:   

\[RFC6843\]
:   [Clark, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Gross, K.]{.refAuthor}[, and Q.
    Wu]{.refAuthor}, [\"RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) Extended Report (XR)
    Block for Delay Metric Reporting\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6843]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6843]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2013, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6843>\>.
:   

\[RFC8298\]
:   [Johansson, I.]{.refAuthor}[ and Z. Sarker]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Self-Clocked Rate Adaptation for Multimedia\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8298]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8298]{.seriesInfo}, December
    2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8298>\>.
:   

\[RFC8382\]
:   [Hayes, D., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Ferlin, S.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Welzl, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and K. Hiorth]{.refAuthor}, [\"Shared
    Bottleneck Detection for Coupled Congestion Control for RTP
    Media\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8382]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8382]{.seriesInfo}, June 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8382>\>.
:   

\[RFC8698\]
:   [Zhu, X.]{.refAuthor}[, Pan, R.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Ramalho, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and S. Mena]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Network-Assisted Dynamic Adaptation (NADA): A Unified Congestion
    Control Scheme for Real-Time Media\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8698]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8698]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2020, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8698>\>.
:   

\[RTCP-Multimedia-Feedback\]
:   [Perkins, C.]{.refAuthor}, [\"RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) Feedback
    for Congestion Control in Interactive Multimedia
    Conferences\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-rmcat-rtp-cc-feedback-05]{.seriesInfo},
    4 November 2019,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-rmcat-rtp-cc-feedback-05>\>.
:   

\[RTP-Ext-for-CC\]
:   [Holmer, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Flodman, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and E.
    Sprang]{.refAuthor}, [\"RTP Extensions for Transport-wide Congestion
    Control\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-holmer-rmcat-transport-wide-cc-extensions-01]{.seriesInfo}, 19
    October 2015,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-holmer-rmcat-transport-wide-cc-extensions-01>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#Acknowledgements}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

This document is based on the outcome of a design team discussion in the
RTP Media Congestion Avoidance Techniques (RMCAT) Working Group. The
authors would like to thank [David Hayes]{.contact-name}, [Stefan
Holmer]{.contact-name}, [Randell Jesup]{.contact-name}, [Ingemar
Johansson]{.contact-name}, [Jonathan Lennox]{.contact-name}, [Sergio
Mena]{.contact-name}, [Nils Ohlmeier]{.contact-name}, [Magnus
Westerlund]{.contact-name}, and [Xiaoqing Zhu]{.contact-name} for their
valuable feedback.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Zaheduzzaman Sarker]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson AB]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Torshamnsgatan 23]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
SE-[164 83]{.postal-code} [Stockholm]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Sweden]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+46 10 717 37 43](tel:+46%2010%20717%2037%2043){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <zaheduzzaman.sarker@ericsson.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Colin Perkins]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[University of Glasgow]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[School of Computing Science]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Glasgow]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[G12 8QQ]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United Kingdom]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <csp@csperkins.org>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Varun Singh]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[CALLSTATS I/O Oy]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Annankatu 31-33 C 42]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
FI-[00100]{.postal-code} [Helsinki]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Finland]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <varun.singh@iki.fi>
:::

::: url
URI: <https://www.callstats.io/>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Michael A. Ramalho]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[AcousticComms Consulting]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[6310 Watercrest Way Unit 203]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Lakewood Ranch]{.locality}, [FL]{.region} [34202-5122]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+1 732 832 9723](tel:+1%20732%20832%209723){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <mar42@cornell.edu>
:::

::: url
URI: <http://ramalho.webhop.info/>
:::
:::
:::
