  RFC 8904   DNSWL Email Auth Method Extension   September 2020
  ---------- ----------------------------------- ----------------
  Vesely     Informational                       \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Independent Submission

RFC:
:   [8904](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8904){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   September 2020

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Author:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    A. Vesely
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8904 {#rfcnum}

# DNS Whitelist (DNSWL) Email Authentication Method Extension {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document describes an email authentication method compliant with
RFC 8601. The method consists of looking up the sender\'s IP address in
a DNS whitelist. This document provides information in case the method
is seen in the field, suggests a useful practice, and registers the
relevant keywords.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}

This document does not consider
blacklists.[¶](#section-abstract-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This is a contribution to the RFC Series, independently of any other RFC
stream. The RFC Editor has chosen to publish this document at its
discretion and makes no statement about its value for implementation or
deployment. Documents approved for publication by the RFC Editor are not
candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8904>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Method
    Details](#name-method-details){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [TXT Record
    Contents](#name-txt-record-contents){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [Email Authentication
        Methods](#name-email-authentication-method){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2}
        [4.2](#section-4.2){.xref}.  [Email Authentication Property
        Type](#name-email-authentication-proper){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3}
        [4.3](#section-4.3){.xref}.  [Email Authentication Result
        Names](#name-email-authentication-result){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [Over-Quota
        Signaling](#name-over-quota-signaling){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [Security of DNSSEC
        Validation](#name-security-of-dnssec-validati){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.3}
        [5.3](#section-5.3){.xref}.  [Inherited Security
        Considerations](#name-inherited-security-consider){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1}
        [6.1](#section-6.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2}
        [6.2](#section-6.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [Appendix
    A](#section-appendix.a){.xref}.  [Example](#name-example){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [Appendix B](#section-appendix.b){.xref}.  [Known
    Implementation](#name-known-implementation){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [Appendix C](#section-appendix.c){.xref}.  [Future Possibilities of
    the \'dns\'
    ptype](#name-future-possibilities-of-the){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#section-appendix.d){.xref}[Author\'s
    Address](#name-authors-address){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

One of the many checks that mail servers carry out is to query DNS
whitelists (DNSWLs). That method is fully discussed in
\[[RFC5782](#RFC5782){.xref}\]. The DNS \[[RFC1034](#RFC1034){.xref}\]
lookup is based on the connecting client\'s IP address, IPv4 or IPv6,
and returns zero or more A records. The latter are IPv4 IP addresses in
the range 127.0.0.0/8. Depending on the query, TXT records with varying
content can also be retrieved. Query examples are given in [Appendix
A](#example){.xref}.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

Since the IP address is known as soon as the connection is accepted,
this check can occur very early in an SMTP transaction. Its result can
be used to counterweight policies that typically occur at early stages
too, such as the Sender Policy Framework (SPF) (the last paragraph of
[Appendix
D.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7208#appendix-D.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC7208](#RFC7208){.xref}\] is also illustrated in [Appendix
A](#example){.xref}). In addition, the result of a DNSWL lookup can be
used at later stages; for example, a delivery agent can use it to learn
the trustworthiness of a mail relay in order to estimate the spamminess
of an email message. The latter possibility needs a place to collect
query results for downstream use, which is precisely what the
Authentication-Results header field aims to
provide.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

Results often contain additional data, encoded according to
DNSWL-specific criteria. The method described in this document considers
only whitelists \-- one of the major branches described by
\[[RFC5782](#RFC5782){.xref}\]. There are also blacklists/blocklists
(DNSBLs) and combined lists. Since they all have the same structure, the
abbreviation DNSxL is used to mean any. The core procedures of a Mail
Transfer Agent (MTA) tend to be quite general, leaving particular cases
to be handled by add-on modules. In the case of combined lists, the
boundary MTA (see \[[RFC5598](#RFC5598){.xref}\]), which carries out the
check and possibly stores the result, has to be able to discern at least
the color of each entry, as that is required to make accept/reject
decisions. This document provides for storing the result when the DNSxL
record to be reported is a whitelisting one.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Data conveyed in A and TXT records can be stored as properties of the
method. The meaning of such data varies widely at the mercy of the list
operator; hence, the queried zone has to be stored as well. Mail site
operators who configure their MTAs to query specific DNWSLs marry the
policies of those lists, as, in effect, they become tantamount to local
policies, albeit outsourced. Downstream agents who know DNSWL-specific
encoding and understand the meaning of that data can use it to make
delivery or display decisions. For example, a mail filter that detects
heuristic evidence of a scam can counterweight such information with the
trustworthiness score encoded in the A response so as to protect against
false positives. Mail User Agents (MUAs) can display those results or
use them to decide how to report abusive messages, if configured to do
so.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

This document describes a usage of TXT fields consistent with other
authentication methods, namely to serve the domain name in the TXT
record. That way, a downstream filter could also consider whether the
sending agent is aligned with the author domain, with semantics similar
to \[[RFC7489](#RFC7489){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

At the time of this writing, this method is implemented by Courier-MTA
\[[Courier-MTA](#Courier-MTA){.xref}\]. An outline of the implementation
is given in [Appendix B](#implement){.xref}.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#mresults}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Method Details](#name-method-details){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-method-details}

The result of the method states how the query did, up to the
interpretation of the returned data.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

The method has four possible results:[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

pass:
:   The query successfully returned applicable records. This result is
    usually accompanied by one or both of the policy properties
    described below. Since the list is configured as a DNSWL, agents
    unable to interpret list-specific properties can still derive a
    positive value from the fact that the sender is
    whitelisted.[¶](#section-2-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

none:
:   The query worked but yielded no A record or returned NXDOMAIN, so
    the sender is not whitelisted.[¶](#section-2-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

temperror:
:   The DNS evaluation could not be completed due to some error that is
    likely transient in nature, such as a temporary DNS error (e.g., a
    DNS RCODE of 2, commonly known as SERVFAIL) or other error
    condition. A later attempt may produce a final
    result.[¶](#section-2-3.6){.pilcrow}
:   

permerror:
:   The DNS evaluation cannot work because test entries don\'t work
    (that is, DNSWL is broken) or because queries are over quota
    (reported by a DNS RCODE of 5, commonly known as REFUSED, or by a
    DNSWL-specific property (policy.ip, defined below) with the same
    meaning). A later attempt is unlikely to produce a final result.
    Human intervention is required.[¶](#section-2-3.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Note that there is no \"fail\" result.[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

The following ptype.property items define how the data provided by the
whitelist lookup can be saved.[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

dns.zone:
:   DNSWL query root domain, which defines the meaning of the policy.ip
    property below. Note that an MTA can use a local mirror with a
    different name. The name stored here has to be the best available
    reference for all foreseeable downstream consumers. Setting dns.zone
    to the global zone makes the result intelligible even if the message
    is handed outside of the internal
    network.[¶](#section-2-6.2){.pilcrow}
:   

policy.ip:
:   The bit mask value received in type A response, in dotted quad
    notation. Multiple entries can be arranged in a quoted,
    comma-separated list (quotes are necessary because commas are not
    allowed in a token).[¶](#section-2-6.4){.pilcrow}
:   

policy.txt:
:   The TXT record, if any. Multiple records are concatenated in the
    usual way (explained, for example, in [Section
    3.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7208#section-3.3){.relref} of
    \[[RFC7208](#RFC7208){.xref}\]). See [Section 3](#TXTrecord){.xref}
    for the resulting content and query
    options.[¶](#section-2-6.6){.pilcrow}
:   

dns.sec:

:   This is a generic property stating whether the relevant data was
    validated using DNSSEC \[[RFC4033](#RFC4033){.xref}\]. For the
    present method, the relevant data consists of the reported policy
    properties above or, if the method result is \"none\", its
    nonexistence. This property has three possible
    values:[¶](#section-2-6.8.1){.pilcrow}

    []{.break}

    yes:
    :   DNSSEC validation confirms the integrity of data. [Section
        5.2](#seccon){.xref} considers how that is related to the DNS
        response.[¶](#section-2-6.8.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    no:
    :   The data is not signed. See [Section
        5.2](#seccon){.xref}.[¶](#section-2-6.8.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    na:
    :   Not applicable. No DNSSEC validation can be performed, possibly
        because the lookup is run through a different means than a
        security-aware DNS resolver. This does not necessarily imply
        less security. In particular, \"na\" is used if the data was
        downloaded in bulk and then loaded on a local nameserver, which
        is the case of an MTA querying a local zone different from the
        reported dns.zone. DNS errors, including validation errors, can
        also report \"na\". This is also the value assumed by
        default.[¶](#section-2-6.8.2.6){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   
:::
:::

::: {#TXTrecord}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [TXT Record Contents](#name-txt-record-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-txt-record-contents}

According to \[[RFC5782](#RFC5782){.xref}\], TXT records describe the
reason why IP addresses are listed in a DNSWL. An example of a DNSWL
whose TXT records contain the domain name of the organization assignee
of the sending IP is given in [Appendix B](#implement){.xref}. The
domain name would correspond to the DNS domain name used by or within
the Administrative Management Domain (ADMD) operating the relevant MTA,
sometimes called the \"organizational domain\". In that case, the
authentication provided by this method is equivalent to a DomainKeys
Identified Mail (DKIM) signature \[[RFC6376](#RFC6376){.xref}\] or an
SPF check host \[[RFC7208](#RFC7208){.xref}\], if the DNSWL is
trusted.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

According to a DNSWL\'s policy, attributing responsibility of an IP
address to an organization may require something more than a mere PTR
record consistency. If no domain names can be responsibly associated to
a given IP address, for example, because the IP address was added
without direct involvement of the organization concerned, DNSWLs can use
a subdomain of .INVALID \[[RFC2606](#RFC2606){.xref}\] where the
leftmost label hints at why an address is whitelisted. For example, if
the address 192.0.2.38 was added by the list managers solely based on
their knowledge, the corresponding TXT record might be
AUTOPROMOTED.INVALID so as to avoid explicitly identifying an entity
that didn\'t opt in.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

Following the example of Multicast DNS (see the second paragraph of
[Section 16](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6762#section-16){.relref}
of \[[RFC6762](#RFC6762){.xref}\]), names containing non-ASCII
characters can be encoded in UTF-8 \[[RFC3629](#RFC3629){.xref}\] using
the Normalization Form C \[[NFC](#NFC){.xref}\], as described in
\"Unicode Format for Network Interchange\"
\[[RFC5198](#RFC5198){.xref}\]. Inclusion of unaltered UTF-8 TXT values
in the header entails an environment compatible with Email Address
Internationalization (EAI)
\[[RFC6530](#RFC6530){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

DNS queries with a QTYPE of ANY may lead to inconsistent replies,
depending on the cache status. In addition, ANY is not \"all\", and the
provisions for queries that have QTYPE=ANY
\[[RFC8482](#RFC8482){.xref}\] don\'t cover DNSxLs. A mail server can
issue two simultaneous queries, A and TXT. Otherwise, a downstream
filter can issue a TXT query on its own, if it knows that an A query was
successful and that the DNSWL serves useful TXT records. It is unlikely
that TXT records exist if a query for QTYPE A brought a result of
\"none\".[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA maintains the \"Email Authentication Parameters\" registry with
several subregistries. IANA has made the assignments set out in the
following sections.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Email Authentication Methods](#name-email-authentication-method){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-email-authentication-method}

IANA has created four new entries in the \"Email Authentication
Methods\" registry as follows.[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}

  Method   Definition   ptype    property   Value                                                                                                       Status   Version
  -------- ------------ -------- ---------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ---------
  dnswl    RFC 8904     dns      zone       DNSWL publicly accessible query root domain[¶](#section-4.1-2.2.1.5.1){.pilcrow}                            active   1
  dnswl    RFC 8904     policy   ip         type A response received (or a quoted, comma-separated list thereof)[¶](#section-4.1-2.2.2.5.1){.pilcrow}   active   1
  dnswl    RFC 8904     policy   txt        type TXT query response                                                                                     active   1
  dnswl    RFC 8904     dns      sec        one of \"yes\" for DNSSEC authenticated data, \"no\" for not signed, or \"na\" for not applicable           active   1

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}
:::

::: {#ptype}
::: {#section-4.2 .section}
### [4.2.](#section-4.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Email Authentication Property Type](#name-email-authentication-proper){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-email-authentication-proper}

IANA has created a new entry in the \"Email Authentication Property
Types\" registry as follows.[¶](#section-4.2-1){.pilcrow}

  ptype   Definition   Description
  ------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------
  dns     RFC 8904     The property being reported belongs to the Domain Name System.

  : [Table 2](#table-2){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#section-4.3 .section}
### [4.3.](#section-4.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Email Authentication Result Names](#name-email-authentication-result){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-email-authentication-result}

IANA has created four new entries in the \"Email Authentication Result
Names\" registry as follows.[¶](#section-4.3-1){.pilcrow}

  Auth Method   Code        Specification   Status
  ------------- ----------- --------------- --------
  dnswl         pass        RFC 8904        active
  dnswl         none        RFC 8904        active
  dnswl         temperror   RFC 8904        active
  dnswl         permerror   RFC 8904        active

  : [Table 3](#table-3){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Over-Quota Signaling](#name-over-quota-signaling){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-over-quota-signaling}

Some DNSWLs that provide for free access below a given quota are known
to return special codes to signal that the quota has been exceeded (for
example, 127.0.0.255). If the MTA cannot interpret that value, that case
results in a false positive. It can accept messages that it would
otherwise reject. A DNSWL-specific module would realize this fact and
call for human intervention.[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

Returning an RCODE 5 (REFUSED) conveys the concept that the query is
\"unauthorized\" and human intervention
required.[¶](#section-5.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#seccon}
::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Security of DNSSEC Validation](#name-security-of-dnssec-validati){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-of-dnssec-validati}

The dns.sec property is meant to be as secure as DNSSEC results. It
makes sense to use it in an environment where the DNSSEC validation can
succeed.[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}

[Section 7](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4033#section-7){.relref}
of \[[RFC4033](#RFC4033){.xref}\] examines various ways of setting up a
stub resolver that either validates DNSSEC locally or trusts the
validation provided through a secure channel. For a different class, it
is possible to set up a dedicated, caching, DNSSEC-enabled resolver
reachable by the mail server through interprocess communication on
127.0.0.1. In such cases, the property dns.sec=yes corresponds to the
Authenticated Data (AD) bit in the DNS response
header.[¶](#section-5.2-2){.pilcrow}

When the response contains no DNSSEC data, a security-aware resolver
seeks a signed proof of the nonexistence of a DS record at some
delegation point. If no error is returned, the zone is unsigned and
dns.sec=no can be set. The Security Considerations section of
\[[RFC3225](#RFC3225){.xref}\] states:[¶](#section-5.2-3){.pilcrow}

> The absence of DNSSEC data in response to a query with the DO bit set
> MUST NOT be taken to mean no security information is available for
> that zone as the response may be forged or a non-forged response of an
> altered (DO bit cleared) query.[¶](#section-5.2-4){.pilcrow}

If the application verifies the DNSSEC signatures on its own, it
effectively behaves like a validating resolver and hence can set dns.sec
correspondingly.[¶](#section-5.2-5){.pilcrow}

When the data is downloaded in bulk and made available on a trusted
channel without using DNSSEC, the application sets dns.sec=na or not at
all. For example, consider DNSWLs that publish bulk versions of their
data duly signed using OpenPGP \[[RFC4880](#RFC4880){.xref}\]. It is the
responsibility of system administrators to authenticate the data by
downloading and validating the signature. The result of such validation
is not reported using dns.sec.[¶](#section-5.2-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-5.3 .section}
### [5.3.](#section-5.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Inherited Security Considerations](#name-inherited-security-consider){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-inherited-security-consider}

For DNSSEC, the considerations of [Section
12](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4033#section-12){.relref} of
\[[RFC4033](#RFC4033){.xref}\] apply.[¶](#section-5.3-1){.pilcrow}

All of the considerations described in [Section
7](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8601#section-7){.relref} of
\[[RFC8601](#RFC8601){.xref}\] apply. That includes securing against
tampering all the channels after the production of the
Authentication-Results header field.[¶](#section-5.3-2){.pilcrow}

In addition, the usual caveats apply about importing text from external
online sources. Although queried DNSWLs are well-known, trusted
entities, it is suggested that TXT records be reported only if, upon
inspection, their content is deemed actionable and their format
compatible with the computing environment.[¶](#section-5.3-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-6.1 .section}
### [6.1.](#section-6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2606\]
:   [Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor}[ and A. Panitz]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Reserved Top Level DNS Names\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP
    32]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 2606]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2606]{.seriesInfo}, June 1999,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2606>\>.
:   

\[RFC5782\]
:   [Levine, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS Blacklists and
    Whitelists\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5782]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5782]{.seriesInfo}, February 2010,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5782>\>.
:   

\[RFC8601\]
:   [Kucherawy, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Message Header Field for Indicating
    Message Authentication Status\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8601]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8601]{.seriesInfo}, May 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8601>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-6.2 .section}
### [6.2.](#section-6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC1034\]
:   [Mockapetris, P.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Domain names - concepts and
    facilities\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 13]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    1034]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC1034]{.seriesInfo}, November
    1987, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1034>\>.
:   

\[RFC3225\]
:   [Conrad, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Indicating Resolver Support of
    DNSSEC\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3225]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3225]{.seriesInfo}, December 2001,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3225>\>.
:   

\[RFC3629\]
:   [Yergeau, F.]{.refAuthor}, [\"UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
    10646\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 63]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 3629]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC3629]{.seriesInfo}, November 2003,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3629>\>.
:   

\[RFC4033\]
:   [Arends, R.]{.refAuthor}[, Austein, R.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Larson, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Massey, D.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Rose]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS Security Introduction and
    Requirements\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4033]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4033]{.seriesInfo}, March 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4033>\>.
:   

\[RFC4880\]
:   [Callas, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Donnerhacke, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Finney, H.]{.refAuthor}[, Shaw, D.]{.refAuthor}[, and R.
    Thayer]{.refAuthor}, [\"OpenPGP Message Format\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4880]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4880]{.seriesInfo}, November
    2007, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4880>\>.
:   

\[RFC5198\]
:   [Klensin, J.]{.refAuthor}[ and M. Padlipsky]{.refAuthor}, [\"Unicode
    Format for Network Interchange\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5198]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5198]{.seriesInfo}, March 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5198>\>.
:   

\[RFC5598\]
:   [Crocker, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet Mail
    Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5598]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5598]{.seriesInfo}, July 2009,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5598>\>.
:   

\[RFC6376\]
:   [Crocker, D., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Hansen, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[,
    and M. Kucherawy, Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"DomainKeys Identified Mail
    (DKIM) Signatures\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 76]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    6376]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6376]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2011, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6376>\>.
:   

\[RFC6530\]
:   [Klensin, J.]{.refAuthor}[ and Y. Ko]{.refAuthor}, [\"Overview and
    Framework for Internationalized Email\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6530]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6530]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2012, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6530>\>.
:   

\[RFC6762\]
:   [Cheshire, S.]{.refAuthor}[ and M. Krochmal]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Multicast DNS\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6762]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6762]{.seriesInfo}, February 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6762>\>.
:   

\[RFC7208\]
:   [Kitterman, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Sender Policy Framework (SPF) for
    Authorizing Use of Domains in Email, Version 1\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7208]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7208]{.seriesInfo}, April 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7208>\>.
:   

\[RFC7489\]
:   [Kucherawy, M., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and E. Zwicky, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance
    (DMARC)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7489]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7489]{.seriesInfo}, March 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7489>\>.
:   

\[RFC8460\]
:   [Margolis, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Brotman, A.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Ramakrishnan, B.]{.refAuthor}[, Jones, J.]{.refAuthor}[, and M.
    Risher]{.refAuthor}, [\"SMTP TLS Reporting\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8460]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8460]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2018, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8460>\>.
:   

\[RFC8482\]
:   [Abley, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Gudmundsson, O.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Majkowski, M.]{.refAuthor}[, and E. Hunt]{.refAuthor}, [\"Providing
    Minimal-Sized Responses to DNS Queries That Have
    QTYPE=ANY\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8482]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8482]{.seriesInfo}, January 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8482>\>.
:   

\[Courier-MTA\]
:   [\"Courier Mail Server\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.courier-mta.org/>\>.
:   

\[DNSWL\]
:   [\"dnswl.org - E-Mail Reputation - Protect against false
    positives\"]{.refTitle}, \<<https://www.dnswl.org/>\>.
:   

\[NFC\]
:   [Whistler, K., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Unicode Normalization
    Forms\"]{.refTitle}, [Unicode Standard Annex 15]{.seriesInfo},
    February 2020,
    \<<https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/tr15-50.html>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#example}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Appendix A.](#section-appendix.a){.section-number .selfRef} [Example](#name-example){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-example}

[]{#name-trace-fields-at-the-top-of-}

::: {#section-appendix.a-1.1}
``` sourcecode
Delivered-To: recipient@example.org
Return-Path: <sender@example.com>
Authentication-Results: mta.example.org;
  dkim=pass (whitelisted) header.i=@example.com
Authentication-Results: mta.example.org;
  dnswl=pass dns.zone=list.dnswl.example dns.sec=na
  policy.ip=127.0.10.1
  policy.txt="fwd.example https://dnswl.example/?d=fwd.example"
Received-SPF: fail (Address does not pass Sender Policy Framework)
  client-ip=2001:db8::2:1;
  envelope-from="sender@example.com";
  helo=mail.fwd.example;
  receiver=mta.example.org;
Received: from mail.fwd.example (mail.fwd.example [2001:db8::2:1])
  (TLS: TLSv1/SSLv3,128bits,ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256)
  by mta.example.org with ESMTPS; Thu, 03 Oct 2019 19:23:11 +0200
  id 00000000005DC044.000000005702D87C.000007FC
```
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [Trace Fields at the Top of the
Header](#name-trace-fields-at-the-top-of-){.selfRef}

The message went through a third party, fwd.example, which forwarded it
to the final MTA. The mail path was not arranged beforehand with the
involved MTAs; it emerged spontaneously. This message would not have
made it to the target without whitelisting,
because:[¶](#section-appendix.a-2){.pilcrow}

-   [the author domain published a strict SPF policy
    (-all),[¶](#section-appendix.a-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-3.1}
-   [the forwarder did not alter the bounce address,
    and[¶](#section-appendix.a-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-3.2}
-   [the target usually honors reject on fail, according to [Section
    8.4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7208#section-8.4){.relref} of
    \[[RFC7208](#RFC7208){.xref}\].[¶](#section-appendix.a-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-appendix.a-3.3}

However, the target also implemented the last paragraph of [Appendix
D.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7208#appendix-D.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC7208](#RFC7208){.xref}\]. Its behavior hinges on the following DNS
entries:[¶](#section-appendix.a-4){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-dns-resource-records-for-20}

::: {#section-appendix.a-5.1}
``` sourcecode
  1.0.0.0.2.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.d.b.8.2.0.0.1.
                                               list.dnswl.example.
       IN  A    127.0.10.1
       IN  TXT  "fwd.example https://dnswl.example/?d=fwd.example"
```
:::

[Figure 2](#figure-2){.selfRef}: [DNS Resource Records for 2001:db8::2:1
(line breaks for editorial
reasons)](#name-dns-resource-records-for-20){.selfRef}

If mail.fwd.example had connected from address 192.0.2.1, then the query
name would have been `1.2.0.192.list.dnswl.example`. See full
description in
\[[RFC5782](#RFC5782){.xref}\].[¶](#section-appendix.a-6){.pilcrow}

At connection time, because the remote IP address is whitelisted, the
target MTA did not reject the message before DATA. Instead, it recorded
the SPF fail result and indicated the local policy mechanism that was
applied in order to override that result. Subsequent filtering verified
DKIM \[[RFC6376](#RFC6376){.xref}\].[¶](#section-appendix.a-7){.pilcrow}

At later stages, mail filters can reject or quarantine the message based
on its content. A deeper knowledge of the policy values obtained from
dnswl.example allows interpreting the values of policy.ip and weighing
them against other factors so as to make better
decisions.[¶](#section-appendix.a-8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#implement}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Appendix B.](#section-appendix.b){.section-number .selfRef} [Known Implementation](#name-known-implementation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-known-implementation}

Implementation details mentioned in this section have been stable for
several years. Yet, this description is necessarily superficial, version
dependent, and subject to change.[¶](#section-appendix.b-1){.pilcrow}

Courier-MTA \[[Courier-MTA](#Courier-MTA){.xref}\] can be configured to
look up DNSBLs and DNSWLs, with similar command-line
switches:[¶](#section-appendix.b-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-appendix.b-3}
``` sourcecode
-block=zone[=displayzone][,var[/n.n.n.n][,msg]]
-allow=zone[=displayzone][,var[/n.n.n.n[,]]]
```

[¶](#section-appendix.b-3){.pilcrow}
:::

\"zone\" is the zone to be queried.[¶](#section-appendix.b-4){.pilcrow}

\"displayzone\" is only used for -allow; it is the value to be set in
the dns.zone property.[¶](#section-appendix.b-5){.pilcrow}

\"var\" stands for the environment variable whose existence triggers a
special action. The default variable names result in a conventional
behavior implemented by Courier-MTA. By setting different environment
variables, users can customize the behavior. Conventional behavior
differs widely between -block and -allow. The former rejects the
message; the latter produces Authentication-Results header
fields.[¶](#section-appendix.b-6){.pilcrow}

The n.n.n.n IP address requires a precise A record response. If not
given, any response results in setting the corresponding variable. If
given, variables are set only if the response matches exactly. Such
syntax provides for a very limited interpretation of the information
encoded in A records. However, it is considered to be too complicated
already. Even specifying a range, an enumeration of values, or a regular
expression would require something beyond what a normal user would be
willing to manage.[¶](#section-appendix.b-7){.pilcrow}

Finally, the trailing message, which overrides the 5xx SMTP reply for
-block, is not used for -allow, except that its mere presence requires
querying TXT records to be registered in
policy.txt.[¶](#section-appendix.b-8){.pilcrow}

SPF is part of Courier-MTA\'s core. It is configured separately and
provides for an \"allowok\" keyword to indicate the choice to override
rejection in case of SPF failure and -allow
whitelisting.[¶](#section-appendix.b-9){.pilcrow}

A customary whitelist is defined by DNSWL.org
\[[DNSWL](#DNSWL){.xref}\]. It serves A records encoded as
follows:[¶](#section-appendix.b-10){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

1st octet:
:   127.[¶](#section-appendix.b-11.2){.pilcrow}
:   

2nd octet:
:   0.[¶](#section-appendix.b-11.4){.pilcrow}
:   

3rd octet:
:   Category of business, 15
    values.[¶](#section-appendix.b-11.6){.pilcrow}
:   

4th octet:
:   Trustworthiness/score, 4
    values.[¶](#section-appendix.b-11.8){.pilcrow}
:   

They also serve TXT records containing the domain name followed by a URL
pointing to further information about the relevant organization, such as
what other IP addresses of theirs are being whitelisted. They don\'t use
UTF-8.[¶](#section-appendix.b-12){.pilcrow}

DNSWL.org provides for free registration and free access below 100,000
queries per day. They use a special return code, 127.0.0.255 as
exemplified above, to signal that the quota has been exceeded. Although
Courier-MTA itself does not recognize this return code, it has a mail
filter (zdkimfilter, named after its main usage) that hard codes
recognition of this code and the code for trustworthiness in the 4th
octet.[¶](#section-appendix.b-13){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-appendix.c .section}
## [Appendix C.](#section-appendix.c){.section-number .selfRef} [Future Possibilities of the \'dns\' ptype](#name-future-possibilities-of-the){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-future-possibilities-of-the}

The description of the new ptype proposed in [Section
4.2](#ptype){.xref} says, \"The property being reported belongs to the
Domain Name System.\" That definition can broadly include any tag found
in a domain\'s TXT record. For example, designers of authentication
methods can agree that within a resinfo of a given method, any dns ptype
refers to tags in the relevant DNS record, unless otherwise specified.
So one could have, say:[¶](#section-appendix.c-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-appendix.c-2}
``` sourcecode
Authentication-Results: example.com;
  spf=pass smtp.mailfrom=example.net dns.sec=y;
  dkim=pass header.i=@example.org header.b=jIvx30NG dns.s=tlsrpt
```

[¶](#section-appendix.c-2){.pilcrow}
:::

While dns.sec is defined above, albeit not for the spf method, the use
of tlsrpt in the DKIM record is exemplified in [Section
3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8460#section-3){.relref} of
\[[RFC8460](#RFC8460){.xref}\]. The tag s= is part of the DKIM TXT
record, not to be confused with the selector s=, which is part of a DKIM
signature. Just like the latter can be reported as header.s because the
DKIM header field is in the message header, it may make sense to report
the former as dns.s because the DKIM DNS record is in the
DNS.[¶](#section-appendix.c-3){.pilcrow}

NOTE: This is only a hint at what may become a consistent naming
convention around the new ptype. In any case, any new property using
this ptype requires its own formal definition. This document does NOT
define the property dns.s=, let alone the service
tlsrpt.[¶](#section-appendix.c-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.d .section}
## [Author\'s Address](#name-authors-address){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-address}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Alessandro Vesely]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[v. L. Anelli 13]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[20122]{.postal-code} [Milano]{.locality} [MI]{.region}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Italy]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <vesely@tana.it>
:::
:::
:::
