  RFC 8937          Randomness Improvements   October 2020
  ----------------- ------------------------- --------------
  Cremers, et al.   Informational             \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)

RFC:
:   [8937](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8937){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   October 2020

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    C. Cremers
    :::

    ::: org
    CISPA
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    L. Garratt
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Meraki
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Smyshlyaev
    :::

    ::: org
    CryptoPro
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    N. Sullivan
    :::

    ::: org
    Cloudflare
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    C. Wood
    :::

    ::: org
    Cloudflare
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8937 {#rfcnum}

# Randomness Improvements for Security Protocols {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

Randomness is a crucial ingredient for Transport Layer Security (TLS)
and related security protocols. Weak or predictable \"cryptographically
secure\" pseudorandom number generators (CSPRNGs) can be abused or
exploited for malicious purposes. An initial entropy source that seeds a
CSPRNG might be weak or broken as well, which can also lead to critical
and systemic security problems. This document describes a way for
security protocol implementations to augment their CSPRNGs using
long-term private keys. This improves randomness from broken or
otherwise subverted CSPRNGs.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG) in
the IRTF.[¶](#section-abstract-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
The IRTF publishes the results of Internet-related research and
development activities. These results might not be suitable for
deployment. This RFC represents the consensus of the Crypto Forum
Research Group of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF). Documents
approved for publication by the IRSG are not a candidate for any level
of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8937>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Conventions Used in This
    Document](#name-conventions-used-in-this-do){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Randomness
    Wrapper](#name-randomness-wrapper){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Tag
    Generation](#name-tag-generation){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Application to
    TLS](#name-application-to-tls){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Implementation
    Guidance](#name-implementation-guidance){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Comparison to RFC
    6979](#name-comparison-to-rfc-6979){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.1}
        [10.1](#section-10.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.2}
        [10.2](#section-10.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.12.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#introduction}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

Secure and properly implemented random number generators, or
\"cryptographically secure\" pseudorandom number generators (CSPRNGs),
should produce output that is indistinguishable from a random string of
the same length. CSPRNGs are critical building blocks for TLS and
related transport security protocols. TLS in particular uses CSPRNGs to
generate several values, such as ephemeral key shares and ClientHello
and ServerHello random values. CSPRNG failures, such as the Debian bug
described in \[[DebianBug](#DebianBug){.xref}\], can lead to insecure
TLS connections. CSPRNGs may also be intentionally weakened to cause
harm \[[DualEC](#DualEC){.xref}\]. Initial entropy sources can also be
weak or broken, and that would lead to insecurity of all CSPRNG
instances seeded with them. In such cases where CSPRNGs are poorly
implemented or insecure, an adversary, Adv, may be able to distinguish
its output from a random string or predict its output and recover secret
key material used to protect the connection.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

This document proposes an improvement to randomness generation in
security protocols inspired by the \"NAXOS trick\"
\[[NAXOS](#NAXOS){.xref}\]. Specifically, instead of using raw
randomness where needed, e.g., in generating ephemeral key shares, a
function of a party\'s long-term private key is mixed into the entropy
pool. In the NAXOS key exchange protocol, raw random value x is replaced
by H(x, sk), where sk is the sender\'s private key. Unfortunately, as
private keys are often isolated in Hardware Security Modules (HSMs),
direct access to compute H(x, sk) is impossible. Moreover, some HSM APIs
may only offer the option to sign messages using a private key, yet
offer no other operations involving that key. An alternate, yet
functionally equivalent construction, is
needed.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

The approach described herein replaces the NAXOS hash with a keyed hash,
or pseudorandom function (PRF), where the key is derived from a raw
random value and a private key signature. Implementations
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} apply this technique a) when indirect access to a
private key is available and CSPRNG randomness guarantees are dubious or
b) to provide stronger guarantees about possible future issues with the
randomness. Roughly, the security properties provided by the proposed
construction are as follows:[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

1.  [If the CSPRNG works fine (that is, in a certain adversary model,
    the CSPRNG output is indistinguishable from a truly random
    sequence), then the output of the proposed construction is also
    indistinguishable from a truly random sequence in that adversary
    model.[¶](#section-1-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-1-4.1}
2.  [Adv with full control of a (potentially broken) CSPRNG and ability
    to observe all outputs of the proposed construction does not obtain
    any non-negligible advantage in leaking the private key (in the
    absence of side channel
    attacks).[¶](#section-1-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-1-4.2}
3.  [If the CSPRNG is broken or controlled by Adv, the output of the
    proposed construction remains indistinguishable from random,
    provided that the private key remains unknown to
    Adv.[¶](#section-1-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-1-4.3}

This document represents the consensus of the Crypto Forum Research
Group (CFRG).[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#conventions-used-in-this-document}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Conventions Used in This Document](#name-conventions-used-in-this-do){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-conventions-used-in-this-do}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#wrapper}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Randomness Wrapper](#name-randomness-wrapper){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-randomness-wrapper}

The output of a properly instantiated CSPRNG should be indistinguishable
from a random string of the same length. However, as previously
discussed, this is not always true. To mitigate this problem, we propose
an approach for wrapping the CSPRNG output with a construction that
mixes secret data into a value that may be lacking
randomness.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

Let G(n) be an algorithm that generates n random bytes, i.e., the output
of a CSPRNG. Define an augmented CSPRNG G\' as follows. Let Sig(sk, m)
be a function that computes a signature of message m given private key
sk. Let H be a cryptographic hash function that produces output of
length M. Let Extract(salt, IKM) be a randomness extraction function,
e.g., HKDF-Extract \[[RFC5869](#RFC5869){.xref}\], which accepts a salt
and input keying material (IKM) parameter and produces a pseudorandom
key of L bytes suitable for cryptographic use. It must be a secure PRF
(for salt as a key of length M) and preserve uniformness of IKM (for
details, see \[[SecAnalysis](#SecAnalysis){.xref}\]). L [SHOULD]{.bcp14}
be a fixed length. Let Expand(k, info, n) be a variable-length output
PRF, e.g., HKDF-Expand \[[RFC5869](#RFC5869){.xref}\], that takes as
input a pseudorandom key k of L bytes, info string, and output length n,
and produces output of n bytes. Finally, let tag1 be a fixed,
context-dependent string, and let tag2 be a dynamically changing string
(e.g., a counter) of L\' bytes. We require that L \>= n - L\' for each
value of tag2.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

The construction works as follows. Instead of using G(n) when randomness
is needed, use G\'(n), where[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-3-4 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
           G'(n) = Expand(Extract(H(Sig(sk, tag1)), G(L)), tag2, n)

[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}
:::

Functionally, this expands n random bytes from a key derived from the
CSPRNG output and signature over a fixed string (tag1). See [Section
4](#tag-gen){.xref} for details about how \"tag1\" and \"tag2\" should
be generated and used per invocation of the randomness wrapper. Expand()
generates a string that is computationally indistinguishable from a
truly random string of n bytes. Thus, the security of this construction
depends upon the secrecy of H(Sig(sk, tag1)) and G(L). If the signature
is leaked, then security of G\'(n) reduces to the scenario wherein
randomness is expanded directly from G(L).[¶](#section-3-5){.pilcrow}

If a private key sk is stored and used inside an HSM, then the signature
calculation is implemented inside it, while all other operations
(including calculation of a hash function, Extract function, and Expand
function) can be implemented either inside or outside the
HSM.[¶](#section-3-6){.pilcrow}

Sig(sk, tag1) need only be computed once for the lifetime of the
randomness wrapper and [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} be used or exposed beyond its
role in this computation. Additional recommendations for tag1 are given
in the following section.[¶](#section-3-7){.pilcrow}

Sig [MUST]{.bcp14} be a deterministic signature function, e.g.,
deterministic Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA)
\[[RFC6979](#RFC6979){.xref}\], or use an independent (and completely
reliable) entropy source, e.g., if Sig is implemented in an HSM with its
own internal trusted entropy source for signature
generation.[¶](#section-3-8){.pilcrow}

Because Sig(sk, tag1) can be cached, the relative cost of using G\'(n)
instead of G(n) tends to be negligible with respect to cryptographic
operations in protocols such as TLS (the relatively inexpensive
computational cost of HKDF-Extract and HKDF-Expand dominates when
comparing G\' to G). A description of the performance experiments and
their results can be found in
\[[SecAnalysis](#SecAnalysis){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-9){.pilcrow}

Moreover, the values of G\'(n) may be precomputed and pooled. This is
possible since the construction depends solely upon the CSPRNG output
and private key.[¶](#section-3-10){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#tag-gen}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Tag Generation](#name-tag-generation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-tag-generation}

Both tags [MUST]{.bcp14} be generated such that they never collide with
another contender or owner of the private key. This can happen if, for
example, one HSM with a private key is used from several servers or if
virtual machines are cloned.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

The [RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} tag construction procedure is as
follows:[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

tag1:
:   Constant string bound to a specific device and protocol in use. This
    allows caching of Sig(sk, tag1). Device-specific information may
    include, for example, a Media Access Control (MAC) address. To
    provide security in the cases of usage of CSPRNGs in virtual
    environments, it is [RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} to incorporate all
    available information specific to the process that would ensure the
    uniqueness of each tag1 value among different instances of virtual
    machines (including ones that were cloned or recovered from
    snapshots). This is needed to address the problem of CSPRNG state
    cloning (see \[[RY2010](#RY2010){.xref}\]). See [Section
    5](#sec_tls13){.xref} for example protocol information that can be
    used in the context of TLS 1.3. If sk could be used for other
    purposes, then selecting a value for tag1 that is different than the
    form allowed by those other uses ensures that the signature is not
    exposed.[¶](#section-4-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

tag2:
:   A nonce, that is, a value that is unique for each use of the same
    combination of G(L), tag1, and sk values. The tag2 value can be
    implemented using a counter or a timer, provided that the timer is
    guaranteed to be different for each invocation of
    G\'(n).[¶](#section-4-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#sec_tls13}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Application to TLS](#name-application-to-tls){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-application-to-tls}

The PRF randomness wrapper can be applied to any protocol wherein a
party has a long-term private key and also generates randomness. This is
true of most TLS servers. Thus, to apply this construction to TLS, one
simply replaces the \"private\" CSPRNG G(n), i.e., the CSPRNG that
generates private values, such as key shares,
with[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5-2 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
    G'(n) = HKDF-Expand(HKDF-Extract(H(Sig(sk, tag1)), G(L)), tag2, n)

[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#implementation-guidance}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Implementation Guidance](#name-implementation-guidance){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-implementation-guidance}

Recall that the wrapper defined in [Section 3](#wrapper){.xref} requires
L \>= n - L\', where L is the Extract output length and n is the desired
amount of randomness. Some applications may require n to exceed this
bound. Wrapper implementations can support this use case by invoking G\'
multiple times and concatenating the results.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#iana-considerations}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#security-considerations}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

A security analysis was performed in
\[[SecAnalysis](#SecAnalysis){.xref}\]. Generally speaking, the
following security theorem has been proven: if Adv learns only one of
the signature or the usual randomness generated on one particular
instance, then, under the security assumptions on our primitives, the
wrapper construction should output randomness that is indistinguishable
from a random string.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

The main reason one might expect the signature to be exposed is via a
side-channel attack. It is therefore prudent when implementing this
construction to take into consideration the extra long-term key
operation if equipment is used in a hostile environment when such
considerations are necessary. Hence, it is recommended to generate a key
specifically for the purposes of the defined construction and not to use
it another way.[¶](#section-8-2){.pilcrow}

The signature in the construction, as well as in the protocol itself,
[MUST NOT]{.bcp14} use randomness from entropy sources with dubious
security guarantees. Thus, the signature scheme [MUST]{.bcp14} either
use a reliable entropy source (independent from the CSPRNG that is being
improved with the proposed construction) or be deterministic; if the
signatures are probabilistic and use weak entropy, our construction does
not help, and the signatures are still vulnerable due to repeat
randomness attacks. In such an attack, Adv might be able to recover the
long-term key used in the signature.[¶](#section-8-3){.pilcrow}

Under these conditions, applying this construction should never yield
worse security guarantees than not applying it, assuming that applying
the PRF does not reduce entropy. We believe there is always merit in
analyzing protocols specifically. However, this construction is generic
so the analyses of many protocols will still hold even if this proposed
construction is incorporated.[¶](#section-8-4){.pilcrow}

The proposed construction cannot provide any guarantees of security if
the CSPRNG state is cloned due to the virtual machine snapshots or
process forking (see \[[MAFS2017](#MAFS2017){.xref}\]). It is
[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} that tag1 incorporate all available information
about the environment, such as process attributes, virtual machine user
information, etc.[¶](#section-8-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#comparison-to-rfc-6979}
::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Comparison to RFC 6979](#name-comparison-to-rfc-6979){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-comparison-to-rfc-6979}

The construction proposed herein has similarities with that of
\[[RFC6979](#RFC6979){.xref}\]; both of them use private keys to seed a
deterministic random number generator. [Section
3.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6979#section-3.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC6979](#RFC6979){.xref}\] recommends deterministically
instantiating an instance of the HMAC_DRBG pseudorandom number
generator, described in \[[SP80090A](#SP80090A){.xref}\] and Annex D of
\[[X962](#X962){.xref}\], using the private key sk as the entropy_input
parameter and H(m) as the nonce. The construction G\'(n) provided herein
is similar, with such difference that a key derived from G(n) and
H(Sig(sk, tag1)) is used as the entropy input and tag2 is the
nonce.[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

However, the semantics and the security properties obtained by using
these two constructions are different. The proposed construction aims to
improve CSPRNG usage such that certain trusted randomness would remain
even if the CSPRNG is completely broken. Using a signature scheme that
requires entropy sources according to \[[RFC6979](#RFC6979){.xref}\] is
intended for different purposes and does not assume possession of any
entropy source \-- even an unstable one. For example, if in a certain
system all private key operations are performed within an HSM, then the
differences will manifest as follows: the HMAC_DRBG construction
described in \[[RFC6979](#RFC6979){.xref}\] may be implemented inside
the HSM for the sake of signature generation, while the proposed
construction would assume calling the signature implemented in the
HSM.[¶](#section-9-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-10.1 .section}
### [10.1.](#section-10.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC5869\]
:   [Krawczyk, H.]{.refAuthor}[ and P. Eronen]{.refAuthor},
    [\"HMAC-based Extract-and-Expand Key Derivation Function
    (HKDF)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5869]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5869]{.seriesInfo}, May 2010,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5869>\>.
:   

\[RFC6979\]
:   [Pornin, T.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Deterministic Usage of the Digital
    Signature Algorithm (DSA) and Elliptic Curve Digital Signature
    Algorithm (ECDSA)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6979]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6979]{.seriesInfo}, August 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6979>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-10.2 .section}
### [10.2.](#section-10.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[DebianBug\]
:   [Yilek, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Shacham, H.]{.refAuthor}[, Enright, B.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Savage]{.refAuthor}, [\"When private keys are public: results from
    the 2008 Debian OpenSSL vulnerability\"]{.refTitle}, [ICM
    \'09]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1145/1644893.1644896]{.seriesInfo},
    November 2009,
    \<<https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/fcf9/fe0946c20e936b507c023bbf89160cc995b9.pdf>\>.
:   

\[DualEC\]
:   [Bernstein, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Lange, T.]{.refAuthor}[, and R.
    Niederhagen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Dual EC: A Standardized Back
    Door\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI 10.1007/978-3-662-49301-4_17]{.seriesInfo},
    March 2016,
    \<<https://projectbullrun.org/dual-ec/documents/dual-ec-20150731.pdf>\>.
:   

\[MAFS2017\]
:   [McGrew, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Anderson, B.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Fluhrer, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and C. Schenefiel]{.refAuthor}, [\"PRNG
    Failures and TLS Vulnerabilities in the Wild\"]{.refTitle}, January
    2017, \<<https://rwc.iacr.org/2017/Slides/david.mcgrew.pptx>\>.
:   

\[NAXOS\]
:   [LaMacchia, B.]{.refAuthor}[, Lauter, K.]{.refAuthor}[, and A.
    Mityagin]{.refAuthor}, [\"Stronger Security of Authenticated Key
    Exchange\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1007/978-3-540-75670-5_1]{.seriesInfo}, November 2007,
    \<<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/strongake-submitted.pdf>\>.
:   

\[RY2010\]
:   [Ristenpart, T.]{.refAuthor}[ and S. Yilek]{.refAuthor}, [\"When
    Good Randomness Goes Bad: Virtual Machine Reset Vulnerabilities and
    Hedging Deployed Cryptography\"]{.refTitle}, January 2010,
    \<<https://rist.tech.cornell.edu/papers/sslhedge.pdf>\>.
:   

\[SecAnalysis\]
:   [Akhmetzyanova, L.]{.refAuthor}[, Cremers, C.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Garratt, L.]{.refAuthor}[, Smyshlyaev, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and N.
    Sullivan]{.refAuthor}, [\"Limiting the impact of unreliable
    randomness in deployed security protocols\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1109/CSF49147.2020.00027]{.seriesInfo}, [IEEE 33rd Computer
    Security Foundations Symposium (CSF), Boston, MA, USA, pp.
    385-393]{.seriesInfo}, 2020,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/CSF49147.2020.00027>\>.
:   

\[SP80090A\]
:   [National Institute of Standards and Technology]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Recommendation for Random Number Generation Using Deterministic
    Random Bit Generators, Special Publication 800-90A Revision
    1\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI 10.6028/NIST.SP.800-90Ar1]{.seriesInfo}, June
    2015, \<<https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-90Ar1>\>.
:   

\[X962\]
:   [American National Standard for Financial Services
    (ANSI)]{.refAuthor}, [\"Public Key Cryptography for the Financial
    Services Industry, The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm
    (ECDSA)\"]{.refTitle}, [ANSI X9.62]{.refContent}, November 2005,
    \<<https://www.techstreet.com/standards/x9-x9-62-2005?product_id=1327225>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#acknowledgements}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

We thank [Liliya Akhmetzyanova]{.contact-name} for her deep involvement
in the security assessment in \[[SecAnalysis](#SecAnalysis){.xref}\]. We
thank [John Mattsson]{.contact-name}, [Martin Thomson]{.contact-name},
and [Rich Salz]{.contact-name} for their careful readings and useful
comments.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cas Cremers]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[CISPA]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Saarland Informatics Campus]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Saarbruecken]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Germany]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <cremers@cispa.saarland>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Luke Garratt]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Meraki]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[500 Terry A Francois Blvd]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[San Francisco]{.locality},
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <lgarratt@cisco.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Stanislav Smyshlyaev]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[CryptoPro]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[18, Suschevsky val]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Moscow]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Russian Federation]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <svs@cryptopro.ru>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Nick Sullivan]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cloudflare]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[101 Townsend St]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[San Francisco]{.locality},
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <nick@cloudflare.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Christopher A. Wood]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cloudflare]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[101 Townsend St]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[San Francisco]{.locality},
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <caw@heapingbits.net>
:::
:::
:::
