  RFC 8957         MPLS FL           January 2021
  ---------------- ----------------- --------------
  Bryant, et al.   Standards Track   \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8957](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8957){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   January 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Bryant
    :::

    ::: org
    Futurewei Technologies Inc.
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Chen
    :::

    ::: org
    Huawei
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    G. Swallow
    :::

    ::: org
    Southend Technical Center
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Sivabalan
    :::

    ::: org
    Ciena Corporation
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    G. Mirsky
    :::

    ::: org
    ZTE Corp.
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8957 {#rfcnum}

# Synonymous Flow Label Framework {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

RFC 8372 (\"MPLS Flow Identification Considerations\") describes the
requirement for introducing flow identities within the MPLS
architecture. This document describes a method of accomplishing this by
using a technique called \"Synonymous Flow Labels\" in which labels that
mimic the behavior of other labels provide the identification service.
These identifiers can be used to trigger per-flow operations on the
packet at the receiving label switching
router.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8957>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Requirements
    Language](#name-requirements-language){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Synonymous Flow
    Labels](#name-synonymous-flow-labels){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [User Service Traffic in the Data
    Plane](#name-user-service-traffic-in-the){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [Application Label
        Present](#name-application-label-present){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.1){.pilcrow}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.2.1}
            [4.1.1](#section-4.1.1){.xref}.  [Setting TTL and the
            Traffic Class
            Bits](#name-setting-ttl-and-the-traffic){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2}
        [4.2](#section-4.2){.xref}.  [Single-Label
        Stack](#name-single-label-stack){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.1){.pilcrow}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.2.1}
            [4.2.1](#section-4.2.1){.xref}.  [Setting TTL and the
            Traffic Class
            Bits](#name-setting-ttl-and-the-traffic-){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3}
        [4.3](#section-4.3){.xref}.  [Aggregation of SFL
        Actions](#name-aggregation-of-sfl-actions){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Equal-Cost Multipath
    Considerations](#name-equal-cost-multipath-consid){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Privacy
    Considerations](#name-privacy-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1}
        [9.1](#section-9.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.2}
        [9.2](#section-9.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Contributors](#name-contributors){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#introduction}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

\[[RFC8372](#RFC8372){.xref}\] (\"MPLS Flow Identification
Considerations\") describes the requirement for introducing flow
identities within the MPLS architecture. This document describes a
method of providing the required identification by using a technique
called \"Synonymous Flow Labels (SFLs)\" in which labels that mimic the
behavior of other MPLS labels provide the identification service. These
identifiers can be used to trigger per-flow operations on the packet at
the receiving label switching router.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#requirements-language}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Requirements Language](#name-requirements-language){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-requirements-language}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#SFL}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Synonymous Flow Labels](#name-synonymous-flow-labels){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-synonymous-flow-labels}

An SFL is defined to be a label that causes exactly the same behavior at
the egress Label Edge Router (LER) as the label it replaces, except that
it also causes one or more additional actions that have been previously
agreed between the peer LERs to be executed on the packet. There are
many possible additional actions, such as measuring the number of
received packets in a flow, triggering an IP Flow Information Export
(IPFIX) \[[RFC7011](#RFC7011){.xref}\] capture, triggering other types
of deep packet inspection, or identifying the packet source. For
example, in a Performance Monitoring (PM) application, the agreed action
could be recording the receipt of the packet by incrementing a packet
counter. This is a natural action in many MPLS implementations, and
where supported, this permits the implementation of high-quality packet
loss measurement without any change to the packet-forwarding
system.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

To illustrate the use of this technology, we start by considering the
case where there is an `application` label in the MPLS label stack. As a
first example, let us consider a pseudowire (PW)
\[[RFC3985](#RFC3985){.xref}\] on which it is desired to make packet
loss measurements. Two labels, synonymous with the PW labels, are
obtained from the egress terminating provider edge (T-PE). By
alternating between these SFLs and using them in place of the PW label,
the PW packets may be batched for counting without any impact on the PW
forwarding behavior \[[RFC8321](#RFC8321){.xref}\] (note that strictly
only one SFL is needed in this application, but that is an optimization
that is a matter for the implementor). The method of obtaining these
additional labels is outside the scope of this text; however, one
control protocol that provides a method of obtaining SFLs is described
in
\[[MPLS-SFL-CONTROL](#I-D.bryant-mpls-sfl-control){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

Next, consider an MPLS application that is multipoint to point, such as
a VPN. Here, it is necessary to identify a packet batch from a specific
source. This is achieved by making the SFLs source specific, so that
batches from one source are marked differently from batches from another
source. The sources all operate independently and asynchronously from
each other, independently coordinating with the destination. Each
ingress LER is thus able to establish its own SFL to identify the
subflow and thus enable PM per flow.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

Finally, we need to consider the case where there is no MPLS application
label such as occurs when sending IP over a Label Switched Path (LSP),
i.e., there is a single label in the MPLS label stack. In this case,
introducing an SFL that was synonymous with the LSP label would
introduce network-wide forwarding state. This would not be acceptable
for scaling reasons. Therefore, we have no choice but to introduce an
additional label. Where penultimate hop popping (PHP) is in use, the
semantics of this additional label can be similar to the LSP label.
Where PHP is not in use, the semantics are similar to an MPLS Explicit
NULL \[[RFC3032](#RFC3032){.xref}\]. In both of these cases, the label
has the additional semantics of the SFL.[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}

Note that to achieve the goals set out above, SFLs need to be allocated
from the platform label table.[¶](#section-3-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#user-service-traffic-in-the-data-plane}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [User Service Traffic in the Data Plane](#name-user-service-traffic-in-the){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-user-service-traffic-in-the}

As noted in [Section 3](#SFL){.xref}, it is necessary to consider two
cases:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

1.  [Application label is
    present[¶](#section-4-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.1}
2.  [Single-label stack[¶](#section-4-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.2}

::: {#ALP}
::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Application Label Present](#name-application-label-present){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-application-label-present}

[Figure 1](#Figure1){.xref} shows the case in which both an LSP label
and an application label are present in the MPLS label stack. Traffic
with no SFL function present runs over the `normal` stack, and
SFL-enabled flows run over the SFL stack with the SFL used to indicate
the packet batch.[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-use-of-synonymous-labels-in}

::: {#Figure1}
::: {#section-4.1-2.1 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
     +-----------------+          +-----------------+
     |      LSP        |          |      LSP        |
     |     Label       |          |     Label       |
     |  (May be PHPed) |          |  (May be PHPed) |
     +-----------------+          +-----------------+
     |                 |          |                 |
     |  Application    |          | Synonymous Flow |
     |     Label       |          |     Label       |
     +-----------------+ <= BoS   +-----------------+ <= Bottom of Stack
     |                 |          |                 |
     |   Payload       |          |   Payload       |
     |                 |          |                 |
     +-----------------+          +-----------------+

    "Normal" Label Stack         Label Stack with SFL
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [Use of Synonymous Labels in a
Two-Label MPLS Label Stack](#name-use-of-synonymous-labels-in){.selfRef}
:::

At the egress LER, the LSP label is popped (if present). Then, the SFL
is processed executing both the synonymous function and the
corresponding application function.[¶](#section-4.1-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#TTLandTC}
::: {#section-4.1.1 .section}
#### [4.1.1.](#section-4.1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Setting TTL and the Traffic Class Bits](#name-setting-ttl-and-the-traffic){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-setting-ttl-and-the-traffic}

The TTL and the Traffic Class bits \[[RFC5462](#RFC5462){.xref}\] in the
SFL label stack entry (LSE) would normally be set to the same value as
would have been set in the label that the SFL is synonymous with.
However, it is recognized that, if there is an application need, these
fields in the SFL LSE [MAY]{.bcp14} be set to some other value. An
example would be where it was desired to cause the SFL to trigger an
action in the TTL expiry exception path as part of the label
action.[¶](#section-4.1.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#SLS}
::: {#section-4.2 .section}
### [4.2.](#section-4.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Single-Label Stack](#name-single-label-stack){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-single-label-stack}

[Figure 2](#Figure2){.xref} shows the case in which only an LSP label is
present in the MPLS label stack. Traffic with no SFL function present
runs over the \"normal\" stack, and SFL-enabled flows run over the SFL
stack with the SFL used to indicate the packet batch. However, in this
case, it is necessary for the ingress Label Edge Router (LER) to first
push the SFL and then to push the LSP
label.[¶](#section-4.2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-use-of-synonymous-labels-in-}

::: {#Figure2}
::: {#section-4.2-2.1 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
                                  +-----------------+
                                  |      LSP        |
                                  |     Label       |
                                  |  (May be PHPed) |
     +-----------------+          +-----------------+
     |      LSP        |          |                 | <= Synonymous with
     |     Label       |          | Synonymous Flow |    Explicit NULL
     |  (May be PHPed) |          |     Label       |
     +-----------------+ <= BoS   +-----------------+ <= Bottom of Stack
     |                 |          |                 |
     |   Payload       |          |   Payload       |
     |                 |          |                 |
     +-----------------+          +-----------------+

    "Normal" Label Stack         Label Stack with SFL
:::

[Figure 2](#figure-2){.selfRef}: [Use of Synonymous Labels in a
Single-Label MPLS Label
Stack](#name-use-of-synonymous-labels-in-){.selfRef}
:::

At the receiving Label Switching Router (LSR), it is necessary to
consider two cases:[¶](#section-4.2-3){.pilcrow}

1.  [Where the LSP label is still
    present[¶](#section-4.2-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.2-4.1}
2.  [Where the LSP label is penultimate hop
    popped[¶](#section-4.2-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.2-4.2}

If the LSP label is present, it is processed exactly as it would
normally be processed, and then it is popped. This reveals the SFL,
which, in the case of the measurements defined in
\[[RFC6374](#RFC6374){.xref}\], is simply counted and then discarded. In
this respect, the processing of the SFL is synonymous with an MPLS
Explicit NULL. As the SFL is the bottom of stack, the IP packet that
follows is processed as normal.[¶](#section-4.2-5){.pilcrow}

If the LSP label is not present due to PHP action in the upstream LSR,
two almost equivalent processing actions can take place. The SFL can be
treated either 1) as an LSP label that was not PHPed and the additional
associated SFL action is taken when the label is processed or 2) as an
MPLS Explicit NULL with associated SFL actions. From the perspective of
the measurement system described in this document, the behavior of the
two approaches is indistinguishable; thus, either may be
implemented.[¶](#section-4.2-6){.pilcrow}

::: {#setting-ttl-and-the-traffic-class-bits}
::: {#section-4.2.1 .section}
#### [4.2.1.](#section-4.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Setting TTL and the Traffic Class Bits](#name-setting-ttl-and-the-traffic-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-setting-ttl-and-the-traffic-}

The TTL and the Traffic Class considerations described in [Section
4.1.1](#TTLandTC){.xref} apply.[¶](#section-4.2.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#aggregation-of-sfl-actions}
::: {#section-4.3 .section}
### [4.3.](#section-4.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Aggregation of SFL Actions](#name-aggregation-of-sfl-actions){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-aggregation-of-sfl-actions}

There are cases where it is desirable to aggregate an SFL action against
a number of labels, for example, where it is desirable to have one
counter record the number of packets received over a group of
application labels or where the number of labels used by a single
application is large and the resultant increase in the number of
allocated labels needed to support the SFL actions may become too large
to be viable. In these circumstances, it would be necessary to introduce
an additional label in the stack to act as an aggregate instruction.
This is not strictly a synonymous action in that the SFL is not
replacing an existing label but is somewhat similar to the single-label
case shown in [Section 4.2](#SLS){.xref}, and the same signaling,
management, and configuration tools would be
applicable.[¶](#section-4.3-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-aggregate-sfl-actions}

::: {#Figure3}
::: {#section-4.3-2.1 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
                                  +-----------------+
                                  |      LSP        |
                                  |     Label       |
                                  |  (May be PHPed) |
     +-----------------+          +-----------------+
     |      LSP        |          |                 |
     |     Label       |          |   Aggregate     |
     |  (May be PHPed) |          |      SFL        |
     +-----------------+          +-----------------+
     |                 |          |                 |
     |  Application    |          |  Application    |
     |     Label       |          |     Label       |
     +-----------------+ <=BoS    +-----------------+ <= Bottom of Stack
     |                 |          |                 |
     |   Payload       |          |   Payload       |
     |                 |          |                 |
     +-----------------+          +-----------------+

    "Normal" Label Stack         Label Stack with SFL
:::

[Figure 3](#figure-3){.selfRef}: [Aggregate SFL
Actions](#name-aggregate-sfl-actions){.selfRef}
:::

The aggregate SFL is shown in the label stack depicted in [Figure
3](#Figure3){.xref} as preceding the application label; however, the
choice of position before or after the application label will be
application specific. In the case described in [Section
4.1](#ALP){.xref}, by definition, the SFL has the full application
context. In this case, the positioning will depend on whether the SFL
action needs the full context of the application to perform its action
and whether the complexity of the application will be increased by
finding an SFL following the application
label.[¶](#section-4.3-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#equal-cost-multipath-considerations}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Equal-Cost Multipath Considerations](#name-equal-cost-multipath-consid){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-equal-cost-multipath-consid}

The introduction of an SFL to an existing flow may cause that flow to
take a different path through the network under conditions of Equal-Cost
Multipath (ECMP). This, in turn, may invalidate certain uses of the SFL,
such as performance measurement applications. Where this is a problem,
there are two solutions worthy of
consideration:[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

1.  [The operator [MAY]{.bcp14} elect to always run with the SFL in
    place in the MPLS label
    stack.[¶](#section-5-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.1}
2.  [The operator can elect to use entropy labels
    \[[RFC6790](#RFC6790){.xref}\] in a network that fully supports this
    type of ECMP. If this approach is adopted, the intervening MPLS
    network [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} load balance on any packet field other
    than the entropy label. Note that this is stricter than the text in
    [Section
    4.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6790#section-4.3){.relref} of
    \[[RFC6790](#RFC6790){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.2}
:::
:::

::: {#privacy}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Privacy Considerations](#name-privacy-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-privacy-considerations}

IETF concerns on pervasive monitoring are described in
\[[RFC7258](#RFC7258){.xref}\]. The inclusion of originating and/or flow
information in a packet provides more identity information and hence
potentially degrades the privacy of the communication to an attacker in
a position to observe the added identifier. Whilst the inclusion of the
additional granularity does allow greater insight into the flow
characteristics, it does not specifically identify which node originated
the packet unless the attacker can inspect the network at the point of
ingress or inspect the control protocol packets. This privacy threat may
be mitigated by encrypting the control protocol packets by regularly
changing the synonymous labels or by concurrently using a number of such
labels, including the use of a combination of those methods. Minimizing
the scope of the identity indication can be useful in minimizing the
observability of the flow characteristics. Whenever IPFIX or other deep
packet inspection (DPI) technique is used, their relevant privacy
considerations apply.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#security-considerations}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

There are no new security issues associated with the MPLS data plane.
Any control protocol used to request SFLs will need to ensure the
legitimacy of the request, i.e., that the requesting node is authorized
to make that SFL request by the network
operator.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#iana-considerations}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-9.1 .section}
### [9.1.](#section-9.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC3032\]
:   [Rosen, E.]{.refAuthor}[, Tappan, D.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Fedorkow, G.]{.refAuthor}[, Rekhter, Y.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Farinacci, D.]{.refAuthor}[, Li, T.]{.refAuthor}[, and A.
    Conta]{.refAuthor}, [\"MPLS Label Stack Encoding\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    3032]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC3032]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2001, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3032>\>.
:   

\[RFC5462\]
:   [Andersson, L.]{.refAuthor}[ and R. Asati]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Label Stack Entry: \"EXP\"
    Field Renamed to \"Traffic Class\" Field\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5462]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5462]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2009, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5462>\>.
:   

\[RFC6790\]
:   [Kompella, K.]{.refAuthor}[, Drake, J.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Amante, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Henderickx, W.]{.refAuthor}[, and L.
    Yong]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Use of Entropy Labels in MPLS
    Forwarding\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6790]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6790]{.seriesInfo}, November 2012,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6790>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-9.2 .section}
### [9.2.](#section-9.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[MPLS-SFL-CONTROL\]
:   [Bryant, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Swallow, G.]{.refAuthor}[, and S.
    Sivabalan]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Simple Control Protocol for MPLS
    SFLs\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-bryant-mpls-sfl-control-09]{.seriesInfo}, 7
    December 2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bryant-mpls-sfl-control-09>\>.
:   

\[RFC3985\]
:   [Bryant, S., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[ and P. Pate, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3)
    Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3985]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3985]{.seriesInfo}, March 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3985>\>.
:   

\[RFC6374\]
:   [Frost, D.]{.refAuthor}[ and S. Bryant]{.refAuthor}, [\"Packet Loss
    and Delay Measurement for MPLS Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6374]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6374]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2011, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6374>\>.
:   

\[RFC7011\]
:   [Claise, B., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Trammell, B., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[,
    and P. Aitken]{.refAuthor}, [\"Specification of the IP Flow
    Information Export (IPFIX) Protocol for the Exchange of Flow
    Information\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 77]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    7011]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7011]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2013, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7011>\>.
:   

\[RFC7258\]
:   [Farrell, S.]{.refAuthor}[ and H. Tschofenig]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Pervasive Monitoring Is an Attack\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP
    188]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 7258]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7258]{.seriesInfo}, May 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7258>\>.
:   

\[RFC8321\]
:   [Fioccola, G., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Capello, A.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Cociglio, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Castaldelli, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Chen, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Zheng, L.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Mirsky, G.]{.refAuthor}[, and T. Mizrahi]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Alternate-Marking Method for Passive and Hybrid Performance
    Monitoring\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8321]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8321]{.seriesInfo}, January 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8321>\>.
:   

\[RFC8372\]
:   [Bryant, S.]{.refAuthor}[, Pignataro, C.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Chen, M.]{.refAuthor}[, Li, Z.]{.refAuthor}[, and G.
    Mirsky]{.refAuthor}, [\"MPLS Flow Identification
    Considerations\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8372]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8372]{.seriesInfo}, May 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8372>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#contributors}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Contributors](#name-contributors){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-contributors}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Zhenbin Li]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Huawei]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <lizhenbin@huawei.com>
:::
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Stewart Bryant]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Futurewei Technologies Inc.]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <sb@stewartbryant.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mach(Guoyi) Chen]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Huawei]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <mach.chen@huawei.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[George Swallow]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Southend Technical Center]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <swallow.ietf@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Siva Sivabalan]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ciena Corporation]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <ssivabal@ciena.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Gregory Mirsky]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[ZTE Corp.]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <gregimirsky@gmail.com>
:::
:::
:::
