  RFC 8968         Babel over DTLS   January 2021
  ---------------- ----------------- --------------
  Décimo, et al.   Standards Track   \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [8968](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8968){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   January 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    A. Décimo
    :::

    ::: org
    IRIF, University of Paris-Diderot
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    D. Schinazi
    :::

    ::: org
    Google LLC
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Chroboczek
    :::

    ::: org
    IRIF, University of Paris-Diderot
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 8968 {#rfcnum}

# Babel Routing Protocol over Datagram Transport Layer Security {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

The Babel Routing Protocol does not contain any means to authenticate
neighbours or provide integrity or confidentiality for messages sent
between them. This document specifies a mechanism to ensure these
properties using Datagram Transport Layer Security
(DTLS).[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8968>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1}
        [1.1](#section-1.1){.xref}.  [Specification of
        Requirements](#name-specification-of-requiremen){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.2}
        [1.2](#section-1.2){.xref}.  [Applicability](#name-applicability){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.1.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Operation of the
    Protocol](#name-operation-of-the-protocol){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1}
        [2.1](#section-2.1){.xref}.  [DTLS Connection
        Initiation](#name-dtls-connection-initiation){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2}
        [2.2](#section-2.2){.xref}.  [Protocol
        Encoding](#name-protocol-encoding){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.3}
        [2.3](#section-2.3){.xref}.  [Transmission](#name-transmission){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.3.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.4}
        [2.4](#section-2.4){.xref}.  [Reception](#name-reception){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.4.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.5}
        [2.5](#section-2.5){.xref}.  [Neighbour Table
        Entry](#name-neighbour-table-entry){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.5.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.6}
        [2.6](#section-2.6){.xref}.  [Simultaneous Operation of Babel
        over DTLS and Unprotected Babel on a
        Node](#name-simultaneous-operation-of-b){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.6.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.7}
        [2.7](#section-2.7){.xref}.  [Simultaneous Operation of Babel
        over DTLS and Unprotected Babel on a
        Network](#name-simultaneous-operation-of-ba){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.2.2.7.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Interface Maximum Transmission Unit
    Issues](#name-interface-maximum-transmiss){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1}
        [6.1](#section-6.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1.1){.pilcrow}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2}
        [6.2](#section-6.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [Appendix A](#section-appendix.a){.xref}.  [Performance
    Considerations](#name-performance-considerations){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#section-appendix.c){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}[¶](#section-toc.1-1.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

The Babel routing protocol \[[RFC8966](#RFC8966){.xref}\] does not
contain any means to authenticate neighbours or protect messages sent
between them. Because of this, an attacker is able to send maliciously
crafted Babel messages that could lead a network to route traffic to an
attacker or to an under-resourced target, causing denial of service.
This document specifies a mechanism to prevent such attacks using
Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS)
\[[RFC6347](#RFC6347){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-1.1 .section}
### [1.1.](#section-1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Specification of Requirements](#name-specification-of-requiremen){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-specification-of-requiremen}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-1.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-1.2 .section}
### [1.2.](#section-1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Applicability](#name-applicability){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-applicability}

The protocol described in this document protects Babel packets with
DTLS. As such, it inherits the features offered by DTLS, notably
authentication, integrity, optional replay protection, confidentiality,
and asymmetric keying. It is therefore expected to be applicable in a
wide range of environments.[¶](#section-1.2-1){.pilcrow}

There exists another mechanism for securing Babel, namely Message
Authentication Code (MAC) authentication for Babel (Babel-MAC)
\[[RFC8967](#RFC8967){.xref}\]. Babel-MAC only offers basic features,
namely authentication, integrity, and replay protection with a small
number of symmetric keys. A comparison of Babel security mechanisms and
their applicability can be found in
\[[RFC8966](#RFC8966){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1.2-2){.pilcrow}

Note that Babel over DTLS provides a single authentication domain,
meaning that all nodes that have the right credentials can convey any
and all routing information.[¶](#section-1.2-3){.pilcrow}

DTLS supports several mechanisms by which nodes can identify themselves
and prove possession of secrets tied to these identities. This document
does not prescribe which of these mechanisms to use; details of identity
management are left to deployment profiles of Babel over
DTLS.[¶](#section-1.2-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Operation of the Protocol](#name-operation-of-the-protocol){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-operation-of-the-protocol}

Babel over DTLS requires some changes to how Babel operates. First, DTLS
is a client-server protocol, while Babel is a peer-to-peer protocol.
Second, DTLS can only protect unicast communication, while Babel packets
can be sent to both unicast and multicast
destinations.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-2.1 .section}
### [2.1.](#section-2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [DTLS Connection Initiation](#name-dtls-connection-initiation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-dtls-connection-initiation}

Babel over DTLS operates on a different port than unencrypted Babel. All
Babel over DTLS nodes [MUST]{.bcp14} act as DTLS servers on a given UDP
port and [MUST]{.bcp14} listen for unencrypted Babel traffic on another
UDP port, which [MUST]{.bcp14} be distinct from the first one. The
default port for Babel over DTLS is registered with IANA as the
\"babel-dtls\" port (UDP port 6699, see [Section
4](#iana_considerations){.xref}), and the port exchanging unencrypted
Babel traffic is registered as the \"babel\" port (UDP port 6696, see
[Section 5](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8966#section-5){.relref}
of \[[RFC8966](#RFC8966){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-2.1-1){.pilcrow}

When a Babel node discovers a new neighbour (generally by receiving an
unencrypted multicast Babel packet), it compares the neighbour\'s IP
address with its own, using network byte ordering. If a node\'s address
is lower than the recently discovered neighbour\'s address, it acts as a
client and connects to the neighbour. In other words, the node with the
lowest address is the DTLS client for this pairwise relationship. As an
example, fe80::1:2 is considered lower than
fe80::2:1.[¶](#section-2.1-2){.pilcrow}

The node acting as DTLS client initiates its DTLS connection from an
ephemeral UDP port. Nodes [SHOULD]{.bcp14} ensure that new client DTLS
connections use different ephemeral ports from recently used connections
to allow servers to differentiate between the new and old DTLS
connections. Alternatively, nodes could use DTLS connection identifiers
\[[DTLS-CID](#I-D.ietf-tls-dtls-connection-id){.xref}\] as a
higher-entropy mechanism to distinguish between
connections.[¶](#section-2.1-3){.pilcrow}

When a node receives a new DTLS connection, it [MUST]{.bcp14} verify
that the source IP address is either an IPv6 link-local address or an
IPv4 address belonging to the local network; if it is neither, it
[MUST]{.bcp14} reject the connection. Nodes use mutual authentication
(authenticating both client and server); clients [MUST]{.bcp14}
authenticate servers and servers [MUST]{.bcp14} authenticate clients.
Implementations [MUST]{.bcp14} support authenticating peers against a
local store of credentials. If either node fails to authenticate its
peer against its local policy, it [MUST]{.bcp14} abort the DTLS
handshake. The guidance given in \[[BCP195](#BCP195){.xref}\]
[MUST]{.bcp14} be followed to avoid attacks on DTLS. Additionally, nodes
[MUST]{.bcp14} only negotiate DTLS version 1.2 or higher. Nodes
[MUST]{.bcp14} use DTLS replay protection to prevent attackers from
replaying stale information. Nodes [SHOULD]{.bcp14} drop packets that
have been reordered by more than two IHU (I Heard You) intervals, to
avoid letting attackers make stale information last longer. If a node
receives a new DTLS connection from a neighbour to whom it already has a
connection, the node [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} discard the older connection
until it has completed the handshake of the new one and validated the
identity of the peer.[¶](#section-2.1-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2.2 .section}
### [2.2.](#section-2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Protocol Encoding](#name-protocol-encoding){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-protocol-encoding}

Babel over DTLS sends all unicast Babel packets protected by DTLS. The
entire Babel packet, from the Magic byte at the start of the Babel
header to the last byte of the Babel packet trailer, is sent protected
by DTLS.[¶](#section-2.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2.3 .section}
### [2.3.](#section-2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Transmission](#name-transmission){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-transmission}

When sending packets, Babel over DTLS nodes [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} send any
TLVs over the unprotected \"babel\" port, with the exception of Hello
TLVs without the Unicast flag set. Babel over DTLS nodes [MUST
NOT]{.bcp14} send any unprotected unicast packets. This ensures the
confidentiality of the information sent in Babel packets (e.g., the
network topology) by only sending it encrypted by DTLS. Unless some
out-of-band neighbour discovery mechanism is available, nodes
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} periodically send unprotected Multicast Hellos to
ensure discovery of new neighbours. In order to maintain bidirectional
reachability, nodes can either rely entirely on unprotected Multicast
Hellos, or send protected Unicast Hellos in addition to the Multicast
Hellos.[¶](#section-2.3-1){.pilcrow}

Since Babel over DTLS only protects unicast packets, implementors may
implement Babel over DTLS by modifying an implementation of Babel
without DTLS support and replacing any TLV previously sent over
multicast with a separate TLV sent over unicast for each neighbour. TLVs
previously sent over multicast can be replaced with the same contents
over unicast, with the exception of Hellos as described above. Some
implementations could also change the contents of IHU TLVs when
converting to unicast in order to remove redundant
information.[¶](#section-2.3-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2.4 .section}
### [2.4.](#section-2.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Reception](#name-reception){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-reception}

Babel over DTLS nodes can receive Babel packets either protected over a
DTLS connection or unprotected directly over the \"babel\" port. To
ensure the security properties of this mechanism, unprotected packets
are treated differently. Nodes [MUST]{.bcp14} silently ignore any
unprotected packet sent over unicast. When parsing an unprotected
packet, a node [MUST]{.bcp14} silently ignore all TLVs that are not of
type Hello. Nodes [MUST]{.bcp14} also silently ignore any unprotected
Hello with the Unicast flag set. Note that receiving an unprotected
packet can still be used to discover new neighbours, even when all TLVs
in that packet are silently ignored.[¶](#section-2.4-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2.5 .section}
### [2.5.](#section-2.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Neighbour Table Entry](#name-neighbour-table-entry){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-neighbour-table-entry}

It is [RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} for nodes to associate the state of their
DTLS connection with their neighbour table. When a neighbour entry is
flushed from the neighbour table ([Appendix
A](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8966#appendix-A){.relref} of
\[[RFC8966](#RFC8966){.xref}\]), its associated DTLS state
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} be discarded. The node [SHOULD]{.bcp14} send a DTLS
close_notify alert to the neighbour if it believes the link is still
viable.[¶](#section-2.5-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2.6 .section}
### [2.6.](#section-2.6){.section-number .selfRef} [Simultaneous Operation of Babel over DTLS and Unprotected Babel on a Node](#name-simultaneous-operation-of-b){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-simultaneous-operation-of-b}

Implementations [MAY]{.bcp14} implement both Babel over DTLS and
unprotected Babel. Additionally, a node [MAY]{.bcp14} simultaneously run
both Babel over DTLS and unprotected Babel. However, a node running both
[MUST]{.bcp14} ensure that it runs them on separate interfaces, as the
security properties of Babel over DTLS rely on ignoring unprotected
Babel packets (other than Multicast Hellos). An implementation
[MAY]{.bcp14} offer configuration options to allow unprotected Babel on
some interfaces but not others, which effectively gives nodes on that
interface the same access as authenticated nodes; however, this [SHOULD
NOT]{.bcp14} be done unless that interface has a mechanism to
authenticate nodes at a lower layer (e.g.,
IPsec).[¶](#section-2.6-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2.7 .section}
### [2.7.](#section-2.7){.section-number .selfRef} [Simultaneous Operation of Babel over DTLS and Unprotected Babel on a Network](#name-simultaneous-operation-of-ba){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-simultaneous-operation-of-ba}

If Babel over DTLS and unprotected Babel are both operated on the same
network, the Babel over DTLS implementation will receive unprotected
Multicast Hellos and attempt to initiate a DTLS connection. These
connection attempts can be sent to nodes that only run unprotected
Babel, who will not respond. Babel over DTLS implementations
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} therefore rate-limit their DTLS connection attempts to
avoid causing undue load on the network.[¶](#section-2.7-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Interface Maximum Transmission Unit Issues](#name-interface-maximum-transmiss){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-interface-maximum-transmiss}

Compared to unprotected Babel, DTLS adds header, authentication tag, and
possibly block-size padding overhead to every packet. This reduces the
size of the Babel payload that can be carried. This document does not
relax the packet size requirements in [Section
4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8966#section-4){.relref} of
\[[RFC8966](#RFC8966){.xref}\] but recommends that DTLS overhead be
taken into account when computing maximum packet
size.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

More precisely, nodes [SHOULD]{.bcp14} compute the overhead of DTLS
depending on the ciphersuites in use and [SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14} send Babel
packets larger than the interface maximum transmission unit (MTU) minus
the overhead of IP, UDP, and DTLS. Nodes [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} send Babel
packets larger than the attached interface\'s MTU adjusted for known
lower-layer headers (at least UDP and IP) or 512 octets, whichever is
larger, but not exceeding 2^16^ - 1 adjusted for lower-layer headers.
Every Babel speaker [MUST]{.bcp14} be able to receive packets that are
as large as any attached interface\'s MTU adjusted for UDP and IP
headers or 512 octets, whichever is larger. Note that this requirement
on reception does not take into account the overhead of DTLS because the
peer may not have the ability to compute the overhead of DTLS, and the
packet may be fragmented by lower layers.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

Note that distinct DTLS connections can use different ciphers, which can
have different amounts of per-packet overhead. Therefore, the MTU to one
neighbour can be different from the MTU to another neighbour on the same
link.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#iana_considerations}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has registered a UDP port number, called \"babel-dtls\", for use by
Babel over DTLS:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

-   [[]{.break}]{#section-4-2.1}

    Service Name:
    :   babel-dtls[¶](#section-4-2.1.1.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Port Number:
    :   6699[¶](#section-4-2.1.1.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Transport Protocols:
    :   UDP only[¶](#section-4-2.1.1.6){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Description:
    :   Babel Routing Protocol over
        DTLS[¶](#section-4-2.1.1.8){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Assignee:
    :   IESG, iesg\@ietf.org[¶](#section-4-2.1.1.10){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Contact:
    :   IETF Chair, chair\@ietf.org[¶](#section-4-2.1.1.12){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Reference:
    :   RFC 8968[¶](#section-4-2.1.1.14){.pilcrow}
    :   

    Service Code:
    :   None[¶](#section-4-2.1.1.16){.pilcrow}
    :   
:::
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

A malicious client might attempt to perform a high number of DTLS
handshakes with a server. As the clients are not uniquely identified by
the protocol until the handshake completes and can be obfuscated with
IPv6 temporary addresses, a server needs to mitigate the impact of such
an attack. Note that attackers might attempt to keep in-progress
handshakes open for as long as possible by using variants on the attack
commonly known as Slowloris \[[SLOWLORIS](#SLOWLORIS){.xref}\].
Mitigating these attacks might involve limiting the rate of handshakes
from a given subnet or more advanced denial of service avoidance
techniques beyond the scope of this document.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

Babel over DTLS allows sending Multicast Hellos unprotected; attackers
can therefore tamper with them. For example, an attacker could send
erroneous values for the Seqno and Interval fields, causing
bidirectional reachability detection to fail. While implementations
[MAY]{.bcp14} use Multicast Hellos for link quality estimation, they
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} also emit protected Unicast Hellos to prevent this
class of denial-of-service attack.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}

While DTLS provides protection against an attacker that replays valid
packets, DTLS is not able to detect when an active on-path attacker
intercepts valid packets and resends them at a later time. This attack
could be used to make a node believe it has bidirectional reachability
to a neighbour even though that neighbour has disconnected from the
network. To prevent this attack, nodes [MUST]{.bcp14} discard the DTLS
state associated with a neighbour after a finite time of not receiving
valid DTLS packets. This can be implemented by, for example, discarding
a neighbour\'s DTLS state when its associated IHU timer fires. Note that
relying solely on the receipt of Hellos is not sufficient as Multicast
Hellos are sent unprotected. Additionally, an attacker could save some
packets and replay them later in hopes of propagating stale routing
information at a later time. This can be mitigated by discarding
received packets that have been reordered by more than two IHU
intervals.[¶](#section-5-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-6.1 .section}
### [6.1.](#section-6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[BCP195\]
:   [Sheffer, Y.]{.refAuthor}[, Holz, R.]{.refAuthor}[, and P.
    Saint-Andre]{.refAuthor}, [\"Recommendations for Secure Use of
    Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security
    (DTLS)\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 195]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    7525]{.seriesInfo}, May 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp195>\>.
:   

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC6347\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}[ and N. Modadugu]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Datagram Transport Layer Security Version 1.2\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6347]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6347]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2012, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6347>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8966\]
:   [Chroboczek, J.]{.refAuthor}[ and D. Schinazi]{.refAuthor}, [\"The
    Babel Routing Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8966]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8966]{.seriesInfo}, January 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8966>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-6.2 .section}
### [6.2.](#section-6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[DTLS-CID\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}[, Tschofenig, H.]{.refAuthor}[, and T.
    Fossati]{.refAuthor}, [\"Connection Identifiers for DTLS
    1.2\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-tls-dtls-connection-id-08]{.seriesInfo}, 2 November 2020,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-tls-dtls-connection-id-08>\>.
:   

\[RFC7250\]
:   [Wouters, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[, Tschofenig, H., Ed.]{.refAuthor}[,
    Gilmore, J.]{.refAuthor}[, Weiler, S.]{.refAuthor}[, and T.
    Kivinen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using Raw Public Keys in Transport Layer
    Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security
    (DTLS)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7250]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7250]{.seriesInfo}, June 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7250>\>.
:   

\[RFC7918\]
:   [Langley, A.]{.refAuthor}[, Modadugu, N.]{.refAuthor}[, and B.
    Moeller]{.refAuthor}, [\"Transport Layer Security (TLS) False
    Start\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7918]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7918]{.seriesInfo}, August 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7918>\>.
:   

\[RFC7924\]
:   [Santesson, S.]{.refAuthor}[ and H. Tschofenig]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Transport Layer Security (TLS) Cached Information
    Extension\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7924]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7924]{.seriesInfo}, July 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7924>\>.
:   

\[RFC8094\]
:   [Reddy, T.]{.refAuthor}[, Wing, D.]{.refAuthor}[, and P.
    Patil]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS over Datagram Transport Layer Security
    (DTLS)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8094]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8094]{.seriesInfo}, February 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8094>\>.
:   

\[RFC8967\]
:   [Dô, C.]{.refAuthor}[, Kolodziejak, W.]{.refAuthor}[, and J.
    Chroboczek]{.refAuthor}, [\"MAC Authentication for the Babel Routing
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8967]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8967]{.seriesInfo}, January 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8967>\>.
:   

\[SLOWLORIS\]
:   [Hansen, R.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Slowloris HTTP DoS\"]{.refTitle}, June
    2009,
    \<<https://web.archive.org/web/20150315054838/http://ha.ckers.org/slowloris/>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Appendix A.](#section-appendix.a){.section-number .selfRef} [Performance Considerations](#name-performance-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-performance-considerations}

To reduce the number of octets taken by the DTLS handshake, especially
the size of the certificate in the ServerHello (which can be several
kilobytes), Babel peers can use raw public keys
\[[RFC7250](#RFC7250){.xref}\] or the Cached Information Extension
\[[RFC7924](#RFC7924){.xref}\]. The Cached Information Extension avoids
transmitting the server\'s certificate and certificate chain if the
client has cached that information from a previous TLS handshake. TLS
False Start \[[RFC7918](#RFC7918){.xref}\] can reduce round trips by
allowing the TLS second flight of messages (ChangeCipherSpec) to also
contain the (encrypted) Babel
packet.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

The authors would like to thank [Roman Danyliw]{.contact-name}, [Donald
Eastlake]{.contact-name}, [Thomas Fossati]{.contact-name}, [Benjamin
Kaduk]{.contact-name}, [Gabriel Kerneis]{.contact-name}, [Mirja
Kühlewind]{.contact-name}, [Antoni Przygienda]{.contact-name}, [Henning
Rogge]{.contact-name}, [Dan Romascanu]{.contact-name}, [Barbara
Stark]{.contact-name}, [Markus Stenberg]{.contact-name}, [Dave
Taht]{.contact-name}, [Martin Thomson]{.contact-name}, [Sean
Turner]{.contact-name}, and [Martin Vigoureux]{.contact-name} for their
input and contributions. The performance considerations in this document
were inspired from the ones for DNS over DTLS
\[[RFC8094](#RFC8094){.xref}\].[¶](#section-appendix.b-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.c .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Antonin Décimo]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[IRIF, University of Paris-Diderot]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Paris]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[France]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <antonin.decimo@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[David Schinazi]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Google LLC]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[1600 Amphitheatre Parkway]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mountain View]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [94043]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <dschinazi.ietf@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Juliusz Chroboczek]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[IRIF, University of Paris-Diderot]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Case 7014]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[75205]{.postal-code} [Paris CEDEX 13]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[France]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <jch@irif.fr>
:::
:::
:::
