  RFC 9032               Enroll Beacon     May 2021
  ---------------------- ----------------- ----------
  Dujovne & Richardson   Standards Track   \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9032](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9032){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   May 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    D. Dujovne, [Ed.]{.editor}
    :::

    ::: org
    Universidad Diego Portales
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Richardson
    :::

    ::: org
    Sandelman Software Works
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9032 {#rfcnum}

# Encapsulation of 6TiSCH Join and Enrollment Information Elements {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

In the Time-Slotted Channel Hopping (TSCH) mode of IEEE Std 802.15.4,
opportunities for broadcasts are limited to specific times and specific
channels. Routers in a TSCH network transmit Enhanced Beacon (EB) frames
to announce the presence of the network. This document provides a
mechanism by which additional information critical for new nodes
(pledges) and long-sleeping nodes may be carried within the EB in order
to conserve use of broadcast
opportunities.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9032>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1}
        [1.1](#section-1.1){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.2}
        [1.2](#section-1.2){.xref}.  [Layer 2
        Synchronization](#name-layer-2-synchronization){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.3}
        [1.3](#section-1.3){.xref}.  [Layer 3 Synchronization: IPv6
        Router Solicitations and
        Advertisements](#name-layer-3-synchronization-ipv){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.4}
        [1.4](#section-1.4){.xref}.  [Layer 2
        Selection](#name-layer-2-selection){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Protocol
    Definition](#name-protocol-definition){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Privacy
    Considerations](#name-privacy-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1}
        [6.1](#section-6.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2}
        [6.2](#section-6.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [](#section-appendix.a){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [](#section-appendix.b){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#problems}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

\[[RFC7554](#RFC7554){.xref}\] describes the use of the Time-Slotted
Channel Hopping (TSCH) mode of
\[[IEEE.802.15.4](#IEEE.802.15.4){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

In TSCH mode of IEEE Std 802.15.4, opportunities for broadcasts are
limited to specific times and specific channels. Routers in a TSCH
network transmit Enhanced Beacon (EB) frames during broadcast slots in
order to announce the time and channel
schedule.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

This document defines a new IETF Information Element (IE) subtype to
place into the EB to provide join and enrollment information to
prospective pledges in a more efficient way.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

The following subsections explain the problem being solved, which
justifies carrying the join and enrollment information in the
EB.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

::: {#Terminology}
::: {#section-1.1 .section}
### [1.1.](#section-1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-1.1-1){.pilcrow}

Other terminology can be found in [Section
2.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9030#section-2.1){.relref} of
\[[RFC9030](#RFC9030){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#layer-2-synchronization}
::: {#section-1.2 .section}
### [1.2.](#section-1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Layer 2 Synchronization](#name-layer-2-synchronization){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-layer-2-synchronization}

As explained in [Section
4.5.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8180#section-4.5.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8180](#RFC8180){.xref}\], the EB has a number of purposes: it
carries synchronization information such as the Absolute Slot Number
(ASN) and Join Metric and identifiers for the timeslot template and the
channel hopping sequence, and it indicates the TSCH
slotframe.[¶](#section-1.2-1){.pilcrow}

An EB announces the existence of a TSCH network and the nodes already
joined to that network. Receiving an EB allows a Joining Node (pledge)
to learn about the network and to synchronize with
it.[¶](#section-1.2-2){.pilcrow}

The EB may also be used as a means for a node already part of the
network to resynchronize
\[[RFC7554](#RFC7554){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1.2-3){.pilcrow}

There are a limited number of timeslots designated as broadcast slots by
each router in the network. Considering 10 ms slots and a slotframe
length of 100, these slots are rare and could result in only 1 slot per
second for broadcasts, which needs to be used for the beacon. Additional
broadcasts for Router Advertisements (RA) or Neighbor Discovery (ND)
could be even more scarce.[¶](#section-1.2-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#layer-3-synchronization-ipv6-router-solicitations-and-advertisements}
::: {#section-1.3 .section}
### [1.3.](#section-1.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Layer 3 Synchronization: IPv6 Router Solicitations and Advertisements](#name-layer-3-synchronization-ipv){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-layer-3-synchronization-ipv}

At Layer 3, \[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\] defines a mechanism by which
nodes learn about routers by receiving multicast RAs. If no RA is
received within a set time, then a Router Solicitation (RS) may be
transmitted as a multicast, to which an RA will be received, usually
unicast.[¶](#section-1.3-1){.pilcrow}

Although \[[RFC6775](#RFC6775){.xref}\] reduces the amount of multicast
necessary for address resolution via Neighbor Solicitation (NS)
messages, it still requires multicast of either RAs or RSes. This is an
expensive operation for two reasons: there are few multicast timeslots
for unsolicited RAs; and if a pledge node does not receive an RA, and
decides to transmit an RS, a broadcast Aloha slot (see [Appendix
A.5](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7554#appendix-A.5){.relref} of
\[[RFC7554](#RFC7554){.xref}\]) is consumed with unencrypted traffic.
\[[RFC6775](#RFC6775){.xref}\] already allows for a unicast reply to
such an RS.[¶](#section-1.3-2){.pilcrow}

This is a particularly acute issue for the join process for the
following reasons:[¶](#section-1.3-3){.pilcrow}

1.  [Use of a multicast slot by even a non-malicious unauthenticated
    node for a Router Solicitation (RS) may overwhelm that
    timeslot.[¶](#section-1.3-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-1.3-4.1}
2.  [It may require many seconds of on-time before a new pledge receives
    a Router Advertisement (RA) that it can
    use.[¶](#section-1.3-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-1.3-4.2}
3.  [A new pledge may have to receive many EBs before it can pick an
    appropriate network and/or closest Join Proxy to attach to. If it
    must remain in the receive state for an RA as well as find the EB,
    then the process may take dozens of seconds, even minutes for each
    enrollment attempt that it needs to
    make.[¶](#section-1.3-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-1.3-4.3}
:::
:::

::: {#layer-2-selection}
::: {#section-1.4 .section}
### [1.4.](#section-1.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Layer 2 Selection](#name-layer-2-selection){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-layer-2-selection}

In a complex Low-power and Lossy Network (LLN), multiple LLNs may be
connected together by Backbone Routers (technology such as
\[[RFC8929](#RFC8929){.xref}\]), resulting in an area that is serviced
by multiple, distinct Layer 2 instances. These are called Personal Area
Networks (PANs). Each instance will have a separate Layer 2 security
profile and will be distinguished by a different PANID. The PANID is
part of the Layer 2 header as defined in
\[[IEEE.802.15.4](#IEEE.802.15.4){.xref}\]: it is a 16-bit value that is
chosen to be unique, and it contributes context to the Layer 2 security
mechanisms. The PANID provides a context similar to the Extended Service
Set ID (ESSID) in 802.11 networking and can be considered similar to the
802.3 Ethernet VLAN tag in that it provides context for all Layer 2
addresses.[¶](#section-1.4-1){.pilcrow}

A device that is already enrolled in a network may find after a long
sleep that it needs to resynchronize with the Layer 2 network. The
device\'s enrollment keys will be specific to a PANID, but the device
may have more than one set of keys. Such a device may wish to connect to
a PAN that is experiencing less congestion or that has a shallower
Routing Protocol for LLNs (RPL) tree \[[RFC6550](#RFC6550){.xref}\]. It
may even observe PANs for which it does not have keys, but for which it
believes it may have credentials that would allow it to
join.[¶](#section-1.4-2){.pilcrow}

In order to identify which PANs are part of the same backbone network,
the network ID is introduced in this extension. PANs that are part of
the same backbone will be configured to use the same network ID. For RPL
networks \[[RFC6550](#RFC6550){.xref}\], configuration of the network ID
can be done with a configuration option, which is the subject of future
work.[¶](#section-1.4-3){.pilcrow}

In order to provide some input to the choice of which PAN to use, the
PAN priority field has been added. This lists the relative priority for
the PAN among different PANs. Every EB from a given PAN will likely have
the same PAN priority. Determination of the PAN priority is the subject
of future work; but it is expected that it will be calculated by an
algorithm in the 6LoWPAN Border Router (6LBR), possibly involving
communication between 6LBRs over the backbone
network.[¶](#section-1.4-4){.pilcrow}

The parent selection process \[[RFC6550](#RFC6550){.xref}\] can only
operate within a single PAN because it depends upon receiving RPL DIO
messages from all available parents. As part of the PAN selection
process, the device may wish to know how deep in the LLN mesh it will be
if it joins a particular PAN, and the rank priority field provides an
estimation of each announcer\'s rank. Once the device synchronizes with
a particular PAN\'s TSCH schedule, it may receive DIOs that are richer
in their diversity than this value. The use of this value in practice is
the subject of future research, and the interpretation of this value of
the structure is considered experimental.[¶](#section-1.4-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#protocol-definition}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Protocol Definition](#name-protocol-definition){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-protocol-definition}

\[[RFC8137](#RFC8137){.xref}\] creates a registry for new IETF IE
subtypes. This document allocates a new
subtype.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

The new IE subtype structure is as follows. As explained in
\[[RFC8137](#RFC8137){.xref}\], the length of the subtype content can be
calculated from the container, so no length information is
necessary.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-ie-subtype-structure}

::: {#iesubtype}
::: {#section-2-3.1 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}
                         1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |       2       |R|P| res |  proxy prio |    rank priority      |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-------------+-------------+-----------------+
    | PAN priority  |                                               |
    +---------------+                                               +
    |                     Join Proxy Interface ID                   |
    +                        (present if P=1)                       +
    |                                                               |
    +               +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |               |                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+                                               +
    |                           network ID                          |
    +                   variable length, up to 16 bytes             +
    ~                                                               ~
    +                                                               +
    |                                                               |
    +               +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [IE Subtype
Structure](#name-ie-subtype-structure){.selfRef}
:::

[]{.break}

res:
:   Reserved bits [MUST]{.bcp14} be ignored upon receipt and
    [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be set to 0 when
    sending.[¶](#section-2-4.2){.pilcrow}
:   

R:
:   The RA R-flag is set if the sending node will act as a router for
    host-only nodes relying on stateless address auto-configuration
    (SLAAC) to get their global IPv6 address. Those hosts [MUST]{.bcp14}
    send a unicast RS message in order to receive an RA with the Prefix
    Information Option.[¶](#section-2-4.4){.pilcrow}
:   

:   In most cases, every node sending a beacon will set this flag, and
    in a typical mesh, this will be every single node. When this bit is
    not set, it might indicate that this node may be under provisioned
    or that it may have no additional slots for additional nodes. This
    could make this node more interesting to an
    attacker.[¶](#section-2-4.6){.pilcrow}
:   

P:
:   If the Proxy Address P-flag is set, then the Join Proxy Interface ID
    bit field is present. Otherwise, it is not
    provided.[¶](#section-2-4.8){.pilcrow}
:   

:   This bit only indicates if another part of the structure is present,
    and it has little security or privacy
    impact.[¶](#section-2-4.10){.pilcrow}
:   

proxy prio (proxy priority):
:   This field indicates the willingness of the sender to act as a Join
    Proxy. Lower value indicates greater willingness to act as a Join
    Proxy as described in \[[RFC9031](#RFC9031){.xref}\]. Values range
    from 0x00 (most willing) to 0x7e (least willing). A priority of 0x7f
    indicates that the announcer should never be considered as a viable
    Join Proxy. Only unenrolled pledges look at this
    value.[¶](#section-2-4.12){.pilcrow}
:   

:   Lower values in this field indicate that the transmitter may have
    more capacity to handle unencrypted traffic. A higher value may
    indicate that the transmitter is low on neighbor cache entries or
    other resources. Ongoing work such as
    \[[NETWORK-ENROLLMENT](#I-D.ietf-roll-enrollment-priority){.xref}\]
    documents one way to set this field.[¶](#section-2-4.14){.pilcrow}
:   

rank priority:
:   The rank priority is set by the IPv6 LLN Router (6LR) that sent the
    beacon and is an indication of how willing this 6LR is to serve as a
    RPL parent \[[RFC6550](#RFC6550){.xref}\] within a particular
    network ID. Lower values indicate more willingness, and higher
    values indicate less willingness. This value is calculated by each
    6LR according to algorithms specific to the routing metrics used by
    the RPL \[[RFC6550](#RFC6550){.xref}\]. The exact process is a
    subject of significant research work. It will typically be
    calculated from the RPL rank, and it may include some modifications
    based upon current number of children or the number of neighbor
    cache entries available. Pledges [MUST]{.bcp14} ignore this value.
    It helps enrolled devices only to compare connection
    points.[¶](#section-2-4.16){.pilcrow}
:   

:   An attacker can use this value to determine which nodes are
    potentially more interesting. Nodes that are less willing to be
    parents likely have more traffic, and an attacker could use this
    information to determine which nodes would be more interesting to
    attack or disrupt.[¶](#section-2-4.18){.pilcrow}
:   

PAN priority:
:   The PAN priority is a value set by the Destination-Oriented Directed
    Acyclic Graph (DODAG) root (see \[[RFC6550](#RFC6550){.xref}\],
    typically the 6LBR) to indicate the relative priority of this LLN
    compared to those with different PANIDs that the operator might
    control. This value may be used as part of the enrollment priority,
    but typically it is used by devices that have already enrolled and
    need to determine which PAN to pick when resuming from a long sleep.
    Unenrolled pledges [MAY]{.bcp14} consider this value when selecting
    a PAN to join. Enrolled devices [MAY]{.bcp14} consider this value
    when looking for an eligible parent device. Lower values indicate
    more willingness to accept new nodes.[¶](#section-2-4.20){.pilcrow}
:   

:   An attacker can use this value, along with the observed PANID in the
    EB to determine which PANIDs have more network resources, and may
    have more interesting traffic.[¶](#section-2-4.22){.pilcrow}
:   

Join Proxy Interface ID:
:   If the P bit is set, then 64 bits (8 bytes) of address are present.
    This field provides the Interface ID (IID) of the link-local address
    of the Join Proxy. The associated prefix is well-known as fe80::/64.
    If this field is not present, then IID is derived from the Layer 2
    address of the sender per SLAAC
    \[[RFC4862](#RFC4862){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-4.24){.pilcrow}
:   

:   This field communicates the IID bits that should be used for this
    node\'s Layer 3 address, if it should not be derived from the Layer
    2 address. Communication with the Join Proxy occurs in the clear.
    This field avoids the need for an additional service-discovery
    process for the case where the Layer 3 address is not derived from
    the Layer 2 address. An attacker will see both Layer 2 and Layer 3
    addresses, so this field provides no new
    information.[¶](#section-2-4.26){.pilcrow}
:   

network ID:
:   This is a variable length field, up to 16-bytes in size that
    uniquely identifies this network, potentially among many networks
    that are operating in the same frequencies in overlapping physical
    space. The length of this field can be calculated as being whatever
    is left in the IE.[¶](#section-2-4.28){.pilcrow}
:   

:   In a 6TiSCH network, where RPL \[[RFC6550](#RFC6550){.xref}\] is
    used as the mesh routing protocol, the network ID can be constructed
    from a truncated SHA-256 hash of the prefix (/64) of the network.
    This will be done by the RPL DODAG root and communicated by the RPL
    Configuration Option payloads, so it is not calculated more than
    once. This is just a suggestion for a default algorithm: it may be
    set in any convenient way that results in a non-identifying value.
    In some LLNs where multiple PANIDs may lead to the same management
    device (the Join Registrar/Coordinator (JRC)), then a common value
    that is the same across all the PANs [MUST]{.bcp14} be configured.
    Pledges that see the same network ID will not waste time attempting
    to enroll multiple times with the same network when the network has
    multiple attachment points.[¶](#section-2-4.30){.pilcrow}
:   

:   If the network ID is derived as suggested, then it will be an
    opaque, seemingly random value and will not directly reveal any
    information about the network. An attacker can match this value
    across many transmissions to map the extent of a network beyond what
    the PANID might already provide.[¶](#section-2-4.32){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#security-considerations}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

All of the contents of this IE are transmitted in the clear. The content
of the EB is not encrypted. This is a restriction in the cryptographic
architecture of the 802.15.4 mechanism. In order to decrypt or do
integrity checking of Layer 2 frames in TSCH, the TSCH ASN is needed.
The EB provides the ASN to new (and long-sleeping)
nodes.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

The sensitivity of each field is described within the description of
each field.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

The EB is authenticated at the Layer 2 level using 802.15.4 mechanisms
using the network-wide keying material. Nodes that are enrolled will
have the network-wide keying material and can validate the
beacon.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

Pledges that have not yet enrolled are unable to authenticate the
beacons and will be forced to temporarily take the contents on faith.
After enrollment, a newly enrolled node will be able to return to the
beacon and validate it.[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}

In addition to the enrollment and join information described in this
document, the EB contains a description of the TSCH schedule to be used
by the transmitter of this packet. The schedule can provide an attacker
with a list of channels and frequencies on which communication will
occur. Knowledge of this can help an attacker to more efficiently jam
communications, although there is future work being considered to make
some of the schedule less visible. Encrypting the schedule does not
prevent an attacker from jamming, but rather increases the energy cost
of doing that jamming.[¶](#section-3-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#privacy-considerations}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Privacy Considerations](#name-privacy-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-privacy-considerations}

The use of a network ID may reveal information about the network. The
use of a SHA-256 hash of the DODAGID (see
\[[RFC6550](#RFC6550){.xref}\]), rather than using the DODAGID itself
directly provides some privacy for the addresses used within the
network, as the DODAGID is usually the IPv6 address of the root of the
RPL mesh.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

An interloper with a radio sniffer would be able to use the network ID
to map out the extent of the mesh network.[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#iana-considerations}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has assigned the following value in the \"IEEE Std 802.15.4 IETF IE
Subtype IDs\" registry, as defined by
\[[RFC8137](#RFC8137){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#iana}
  Value   Subtype ID         Reference
  ------- ------------------ -----------
  2       6tisch-Join-Info   RFC 9032

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-6.1 .section}
### [6.1.](#section-6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[IEEE.802.15.4\]
:   [IEEE]{.refAuthor}, [\"IEEE Standard for Low-Rate Wireless
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE Standard 802.15.4-2015]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.1109/IEEESTD.2016.7460875]{.seriesInfo}, April 2016,
    \<<https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7460875>\>.
:   

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC4861\]
:   [Narten, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Nordmark, E.]{.refAuthor},
    [Simpson, W.]{.refAuthor}, and [H. Soliman]{.refAuthor}, [\"Neighbor
    Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4861]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4861]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2007, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4861>\>.
:   

\[RFC6775\]
:   [Shelby, Z., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Chakrabarti, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Nordmark, E.]{.refAuthor}, and [C. Bormann]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Neighbor Discovery Optimization for IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless
    Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6775]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6775]{.seriesInfo}, November
    2012, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6775>\>.
:   

\[RFC8137\]
:   [Kivinen, T.]{.refAuthor} and [P. Kinney]{.refAuthor}, [\"IEEE
    802.15.4 Information Element for the IETF\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8137]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8137]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8137>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC9031\]
:   [Vučinić, M., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Simon, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Pister, K.]{.refAuthor}, and [M. Richardson]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Constrained Join Protocol (CoJP) for 6TiSCH\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    9031]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC9031]{.seriesInfo}, May 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9031>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-6.2 .section}
### [6.2.](#section-6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[NETWORK-ENROLLMENT\]
:   [Richardson, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Jadhav, R. A.]{.refAuthor},
    [Thubert, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [H. She]{.refAuthor}, [\"Controlling
    Secure Network Enrollment in RPL networks\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-roll-enrollment-priority-04]{.seriesInfo}, 7 February
    2021,
    \<<https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-roll-enrollment-priority-04>\>.
:   

\[RFC4862\]
:   [Thomson, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Narten, T.]{.refAuthor}, and [T.
    Jinmei]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6 Stateless Address
    Autoconfiguration\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4862]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4862]{.seriesInfo}, September 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4862>\>.
:   

\[RFC6550\]
:   [Winter, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Thubert, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [Brandt, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Hui, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Kelsey, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Levis, P.]{.refAuthor},
    [Pister, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Struik, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Vasseur,
    JP.]{.refAuthor}, and [R. Alexander]{.refAuthor}, [\"RPL: IPv6
    Routing Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy Networks\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 6550]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6550]{.seriesInfo}, March
    2012, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6550>\>.
:   

\[RFC7554\]
:   [Watteyne, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Palattella, M.]{.refAuthor}, and
    [L. Grieco]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using IEEE 802.15.4e Time-Slotted
    Channel Hopping (TSCH) in the Internet of Things (IoT): Problem
    Statement\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7554]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7554]{.seriesInfo}, May 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7554>\>.
:   

\[RFC8180\]
:   [Vilajosana, X., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Pister, K.]{.refAuthor}, and [T.
    Watteyne]{.refAuthor}, [\"Minimal IPv6 over the TSCH Mode of IEEE
    802.15.4e (6TiSCH) Configuration\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP
    210]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8180]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8180]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8180>\>.
:   

\[RFC8929\]
:   [Thubert, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Perkins, C.E.]{.refAuthor}, and [E.
    Levy-Abegnoli]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6 Backbone Router\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 8929]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8929]{.seriesInfo},
    November 2020, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8929>\>.
:   

\[RFC9030\]
:   [Thubert, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"An Architecture for IPv6 over the
    Time-Slotted Channel Hopping Mode of IEEE 802.15.4
    (6TiSCH)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 9030]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC9030]{.seriesInfo}, May 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9030>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#acknowledgements}
::: {#section-appendix.a .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

[Thomas Watteyne]{.contact-name} provided extensive editorial comments
on the document. [Carles Gomez Montenegro]{.contact-name} generated a
detailed review of the document at Working Group Last Call. [Tim
Evens]{.contact-name} provided a number of useful editorial
suggestions.[¶](#section-appendix.a-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#section-appendix.b .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Diego Dujovne ([editor]{.role})]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Universidad Diego Portales]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Escuela de Informática y Telecomunicaciones\
Av. Ejército 441]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Santiago]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Región Metropolitana]{.region}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Chile]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+56 (2) 676-8121](tel:+56%20(2)%20676-8121){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <diego.dujovne@mail.udp.cl>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Michael Richardson]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Sandelman Software Works]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <mcr+ietf@sandelman.ca>
:::
:::
:::
