  RFC 9063           Host Identity Protocol Architecture   July 2021
  ------------------ ------------------------------------- -----------
  Moskowitz & Komu   Informational                         \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9063](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9063){.eref}

Obsoletes:
:   [4423](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4423){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   July 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    R. Moskowitz, [Ed.]{.editor}
    :::

    ::: org
    HTT Consulting
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Komu
    :::

    ::: org
    Ericsson
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9063 {#rfcnum}

# Host Identity Protocol Architecture {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This memo describes the Host Identity (HI) namespace, which provides a
cryptographic namespace to applications, and the associated protocol
layer, the Host Identity Protocol, located between the internetworking
and transport layers, that supports end-host mobility, multihoming, and
NAT traversal. Herein are presented the basics of the current
namespaces, their strengths and weaknesses, and how a HI namespace will
add completeness to them. The roles of the HI namespace in the protocols
are defined.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}

This document obsoletes RFC 4423 and addresses the concerns raised by
the IESG, particularly that of crypto agility. The Security
Considerations section also describes measures against flooding attacks,
usage of identities in access control lists, weaker types of
identifiers, and trust on first use. This document incorporates lessons
learned from the implementations of RFC 7401 and goes further to explain
how HIP works as a secure signaling
channel.[¶](#section-abstract-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Not all documents approved
by the IESG are candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see
Section 2 of RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9063>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}

This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
Contributions published or made publicly available before November 10,
2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this material
may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow modifications of
such material outside the IETF Standards Process. Without obtaining an
adequate license from the person(s) controlling the copyright in such
materials, this document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards
Process, and derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF
Standards Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
translate it into languages other than
English.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1}
        [2.1](#section-2.1){.xref}.  [Terms Common to Other
        Documents](#name-terms-common-to-other-docum){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2}
        [2.2](#section-2.2){.xref}.  [Terms Specific to This and Other
        HIP Documents](#name-terms-specific-to-this-and-){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Background](#name-background){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [A Desire for a Namespace for
        Computing Platforms](#name-a-desire-for-a-namespace-fo){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Host Identity
    Namespace](#name-host-identity-namespace){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [Host
        Identifiers](#name-host-identifiers){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2}
        [4.2](#section-4.2){.xref}.  [Host Identity Hash
        (HIH)](#name-host-identity-hash-hih){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3}
        [4.3](#section-4.3){.xref}.  [Host Identity Tag
        (HIT)](#name-host-identity-tag-hit){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.4}
        [4.4](#section-4.4){.xref}.  [Local Scope Identifier
        (LSI)](#name-local-scope-identifier-lsi){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.5}
        [4.5](#section-4.5){.xref}.  [Storing Host Identifiers in
        Directories](#name-storing-host-identifiers-in){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [New Stack
    Architecture](#name-new-stack-architecture){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [On the Multiplicity of
        Identities](#name-on-the-multiplicity-of-iden){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Control Plane](#name-control-plane){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1}
        [6.1](#section-6.1){.xref}.  [Base
        Exchange](#name-base-exchange){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2}
        [6.2](#section-6.2){.xref}.  [End-Host Mobility and
        Multihoming](#name-end-host-mobility-and-multi){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.3}
        [6.3](#section-6.3){.xref}.  [Rendezvous
        Mechanism](#name-rendezvous-mechanism){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.4}
        [6.4](#section-6.4){.xref}.  [Relay
        Mechanism](#name-relay-mechanism){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.5}
        [6.5](#section-6.5){.xref}.  [Termination of the Control
        Plane](#name-termination-of-the-control-){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Data Plane](#name-data-plane){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [HIP and NATs](#name-hip-and-nats){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.1}
        [8.1](#section-8.1){.xref}.  [HIP and Upper-Layer
        Checksums](#name-hip-and-upper-layer-checksu){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Multicast](#name-multicast){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [HIP Policies](#name-hip-policies){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [11](#section-11){.xref}. [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.1}
        [11.1](#section-11.1){.xref}.  [MitM
        Attacks](#name-mitm-attacks){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.2}
        [11.2](#section-11.2){.xref}.  [Protection against Flooding
        Attacks](#name-protection-against-flooding){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.3}
        [11.3](#section-11.3){.xref}.  [HITs Used in
        ACLs](#name-hits-used-in-acls){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.4}
        [11.4](#section-11.4){.xref}.  [Alternative HI
        Considerations](#name-alternative-hi-consideratio){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.5}
        [11.5](#section-11.5){.xref}.  [Trust on First
        Use](#name-trust-on-first-use){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [12](#section-12){.xref}. [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.13}
    [13](#section-13){.xref}. [Changes from RFC
    4423](#name-changes-from-rfc-4423){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.14}
    [14](#section-14){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.14.2.1}
        [14.1](#section-14.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.14.2.2}
        [14.2](#section-14.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15}
    [Appendix A](#appendix-A){.xref}.  [Design
    Considerations](#name-design-considerations){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15.2.1}
        [A.1](#appendix-A.1){.xref}.  [Benefits of
        HIP](#name-benefits-of-hip){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15.2.2}
        [A.2](#appendix-A.2){.xref}.  [Drawbacks of
        HIP](#name-drawbacks-of-hip){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15.2.3}
        [A.3](#appendix-A.3){.xref}.  [Deployment and Adoption
        Considerations](#name-deployment-and-adoption-con){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15.2.3.2.1}
            [A.3.1](#appendix-A.3.1){.xref}.  [Deployment
            Analysis](#name-deployment-analysis){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15.2.3.2.2}
            [A.3.2](#appendix-A.3.2){.xref}.  [HIP in 802.15.4
            Networks](#name-hip-in-802154-networks){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15.2.3.2.3}
            [A.3.3](#appendix-A.3.3){.xref}.  [HIP and Internet of
            Things](#name-hip-and-internet-of-things){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15.2.3.2.4}
            [A.3.4](#appendix-A.3.4){.xref}.  [Infrastructure
            Applications](#name-infrastructure-applications){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15.2.3.2.5}
            [A.3.5](#appendix-A.3.5){.xref}.  [Management of Identities
            in a Commercial
            Product](#name-management-of-identities-in){.xref}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.15.2.4}
        [A.4](#appendix-A.4){.xref}.  [Answers to NSRG
        Questions](#name-answers-to-nsrg-questions){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.16}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.17}
    [](#appendix-C){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

The Internet has two important global namespaces: Internet Protocol (IP)
addresses and Domain Name Service (DNS) names. These two namespaces have
a set of features and abstractions that have powered the Internet to
what it is today. They also have a number of weaknesses. Basically,
since they are all we have, we try to do too much with them. Semantic
overloading and functionality extensions have greatly complicated these
namespaces.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

The proposed Host Identity namespace is also a global namespace, and it
fills an important gap between the IP and DNS namespaces. A Host
Identity conceptually refers to a computing platform, and there may be
multiple such Host Identities per computing platform (because the
platform may wish to present a different identity to different
communicating peers). The Host Identity namespace consists of Host
Identifiers (HI). There is exactly one Host Identifier for each Host
Identity (although there may be transient periods of time such as key
replacement when more than one identifier may be active). While this
text later talks about non-cryptographic Host Identifiers, the
architecture focuses on the case in which Host Identifiers are
cryptographic in nature. Specifically, the Host Identifier is the public
key of an asymmetric key pair. Each Host Identity uniquely identifies a
single host, i.e., no two hosts have the same Host Identity. If two or
more computing platforms have the same Host Identifier, then they are
instantiating a distributed host. The Host Identifier can either be
public (e.g., published in the DNS) or unpublished. Client systems will
tend to have both public and unpublished Host
Identifiers.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

There is a subtle but important difference between Host Identities and
Host Identifiers. An Identity refers to the abstract entity that is
identified. An Identifier, on the other hand, refers to the concrete bit
pattern that is used in the identification
process.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Although the Host Identifiers could be used in many authentication
systems, such as [IKEv2](#RFC7296){.xref}
\[[RFC7296](#RFC7296){.xref}\], the presented architecture introduces a
new protocol, called the Host Identity Protocol (HIP), and a
cryptographic exchange, called the HIP base exchange; see also [Section
6](#control-plane){.xref}. HIP provides for limited forms of trust
between systems, enhances mobility, multihoming, and dynamic IP
renumbering, aids in protocol translation and transition, and reduces
certain types of denial-of-service (DoS)
attacks.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

When HIP is used, the actual payload traffic between two HIP hosts is
typically, but not necessarily, protected with Encapsulating Security
Payload (ESP) \[[RFC7402](#RFC7402){.xref}\]. The Host Identities are
used to create the needed ESP Security Associations (SAs) and to
authenticate the hosts. When ESP is used, the actual payload IP packets
do not differ in any way from standard ESP-protected IP
packets.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

Much has been learned about HIP \[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\] since
\[[RFC4423](#RFC4423){.xref}\] was published. This document expands Host
Identities beyond their original use to enable IP connectivity and
security to enable general interhost secure signaling at any protocol
layer. The signal may establish a security association between the hosts
or simply pass information within the
channel.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

::: {#section-2.1 .section}
### [2.1.](#section-2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Terms Common to Other Documents](#name-terms-common-to-other-docum){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terms-common-to-other-docum}

  Term              Explanation
  ----------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Public key        The public key of an asymmetric cryptographic key pair. Used as a publicly known identifier for cryptographic identity authentication. Public is a relative term here, ranging from \"known to peers only\" to \"known to the world\".
  Private key       The private or secret key of an asymmetric cryptographic key pair. Assumed to be known only to the party identified by the corresponding public key. Used by the identified party to authenticate its identity to other parties.
  Public key pair   An asymmetric cryptographic key pair consisting of public and private keys. For example, Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA), Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) and Elliptic Curve DSA (ECDSA) key pairs are such key pairs.
  Endpoint          A communicating entity. For historical reasons, the term \'computing platform\' is used in this document as a (rough) synonym for endpoint.

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}
:::

::: {#section-2.2 .section}
### [2.2.](#section-2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terms Specific to This and Other HIP Documents](#name-terms-specific-to-this-and-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terms-specific-to-this-and-}

It should be noted that many of the terms defined herein are
tautologous, self-referential, or defined through circular reference to
other terms. This is due to the succinct nature of the definitions. See
the text elsewhere in this document and the base specification
\[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\] for more elaborate
explanations.[¶](#section-2.2-1){.pilcrow}

  Term                                       Explanation
  ------------------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Computing platform                         An entity capable of communicating and computing, for example, a computer. See the definition of \'Endpoint\', above.
  HIP base exchange                          A cryptographic protocol; see also [Section 6](#control-plane){.xref}.
  HIP packet                                 An IP packet that carries a \'Host Identity Protocol\' message.
  Host Identity                              An abstract concept assigned to a \'computing platform\'. See \'Host Identifier\', below.
  Host Identifier                            A public key used as a name for a Host Identity.
  Host Identity namespace                    A name space formed by all possible Host Identifiers.
  Host Identity Protocol                     A protocol used to carry and authenticate Host Identifiers and other information.
  Host Identity Hash                         The cryptographic hash used in creating the Host Identity Tag from the Host Identifier.
  Host Identity Tag                          A 128-bit datum created by taking a cryptographic hash over a Host Identifier plus bits to identify which hash was used.
  Local Scope Identifier                     A 32-bit datum denoting a Host Identity.
  Public Host Identifier and Identity        A published or publicly known Host Identifier used as a public name for a Host Identity, and the corresponding Identity.
  Unpublished Host Identifier and Identity   A Host Identifier that is not placed in any public directory, and the corresponding Host Identity. Unpublished Host Identities are typically short lived in nature, being often replaced and possibly used just once.
  Rendezvous Mechanism                       A mechanism used to locate mobile hosts based on their HIT.

  : [Table 2](#table-2){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Background](#name-background){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-background}

The Internet is built from three principal components: computing
platforms (endpoints), packet transport (i.e., internetworking)
infrastructure, and services (applications). The Internet exists to
service two principal components: people and robotic services
(silicon-based people, if you will). All these components need to be
named in order to interact in a scalable manner. Here we concentrate on
naming computing platforms and packet transport
elements.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

There are two principal namespaces in use in the Internet for these
components: IP addresses, and Domain Names. Domain Names provide
hierarchically assigned names for some computing platforms and some
services. Each hierarchy is delegated from the level above; there is no
anonymity in Domain Names. Email, HTTP, and SIP addresses all reference
Domain Names.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

The IP addressing namespace has been overloaded to name both interfaces
(at Layer 3) and endpoints (for the endpoint-specific part of Layer 3
and for Layer 4). In their role as interface names, IP addresses are
sometimes called \"locators\" and serve as an endpoint within a routing
topology.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

IP addresses are numbers that name networking interfaces, and typically
only when the interface is connected to the network. Originally, IP
addresses had long-term significance. Today, the vast number of
interfaces use ephemeral and/or non-unique IP addresses. That is, every
time an interface is connected to the network, it is assigned an IP
address.[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}

In the current Internet, the transport layers are coupled to the IP
addresses. Neither can evolve separately from the other. IPng
deliberations were strongly shaped by the decision that a corresponding
TCPng would not be created.[¶](#section-3-5){.pilcrow}

There are three critical deficiencies with the current namespaces.
First, the establishing of initial contact and the sustaining of data
flows between two hosts can be challenging due to private address realms
and the ephemeral nature of addresses. Second, confidentiality is not
provided in a consistent, trustable manner. Finally, authentication for
systems and datagrams is not provided. All of these deficiencies arise
because computing platforms are not well named with the current
namespaces.[¶](#section-3-6){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [A Desire for a Namespace for Computing Platforms](#name-a-desire-for-a-namespace-fo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-a-desire-for-a-namespace-fo}

An independent namespace for computing platforms could be used in
end-to-end operations independent of the evolution of the
internetworking layer and across the many internetworking layers. This
could support rapid readdressing of the internetworking layer because of
mobility, rehoming, or renumbering.[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

If the namespace for computing platforms is based on public-key
cryptography, it can also provide authentication services. If this
namespace is locally created without requiring registration, it can
provide anonymity.[¶](#section-3.1-2){.pilcrow}

Such a namespace (for computing platforms) and the names in it should
have the following characteristics:[¶](#section-3.1-3){.pilcrow}

-   [The namespace should be applied to the IP \'kernel\' or stack. The
    IP stack is the \'component\' between applications and the packet
    transport
    infrastructure.[¶](#section-3.1-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.1}
-   [The namespace should fully decouple the internetworking layer from
    the higher layers. The names should replace all occurrences of IP
    addresses within applications (like in the Transport Control Block,
    TCB). This replacement can be handled transparently for legacy
    applications as the Local Scope Identifiers (LSIs) and HITs are
    compatible with IPv4 and IPv6 addresses
    \[[RFC5338](#RFC5338){.xref}\]. However, HIP-aware applications
    require some modifications from the developers, who may employ
    networking API extensions for HIP
    \[[RFC6317](#RFC6317){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.1-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.2}
-   [The introduction of the namespace should not mandate any
    administrative infrastructure. Deployment must come from the bottom
    up, in a pairwise
    deployment.[¶](#section-3.1-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.3}
-   [The names should have a fixed-length representation, for easy
    inclusion in datagram headers and existing programming interfaces
    (e.g., the TCB).[¶](#section-3.1-4.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.4}
-   [Using the namespace should be affordable when used in protocols.
    This is primarily a packet size issue. There is also a computational
    concern in
    affordability.[¶](#section-3.1-4.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.5}
-   [Name collisions should be avoided as much as possible. The
    mathematics of the birthday paradox can be used to estimate the
    chance of a collision in a given population and hash space. In
    general, for a random hash space of size n bits, we would expect to
    obtain a collision after approximately 1.2\*sqrt(2^n^) hashes were
    obtained. For 64 bits, this number is roughly 4 billion. A hash size
    of 64 bits may be too small to avoid collisions in a large
    population; for example, there is a 1% chance of collision in a
    population of 640M. For 100 bits (or more), we would not expect a
    collision until approximately 2^50^ (1 quadrillion) hashes were
    generated. With the currently used hash size of 96 bits
    \[[RFC7343](#RFC7343){.xref}\], the figure is 2^48^ (281
    trillions).[¶](#section-3.1-4.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.6}
-   [The names should have a localized abstraction so that they can be
    used in existing protocols and
    APIs.[¶](#section-3.1-4.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.7}
-   [It must be possible to create names locally. When such names are
    not published, this can provide anonymity at the cost of making
    resolvability very
    difficult.[¶](#section-3.1-4.8){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.8}
-   [The namespace should provide authentication
    services.[¶](#section-3.1-4.9){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.9}
-   [The names should be long-lived, but replaceable at any time. This
    impacts access control lists; short lifetimes will tend to result in
    tedious list maintenance or require a namespace infrastructure for
    central control of access
    lists.[¶](#section-3.1-4.10){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.10}

In this document, the namespace approaching these ideas is called the
Host Identity namespace. Using Host Identities requires its own protocol
layer, the Host Identity Protocol, between the internetworking and
transport layers. The names are based on public-key cryptography to
supply authentication services. Properly designed, it can deliver all of
the above-stated requirements.[¶](#section-3.1-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Host Identity Namespace](#name-host-identity-namespace){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-host-identity-namespace}

A name in the Host Identity namespace, a Host Identifier (HI),
represents a statistically globally unique name for naming any system
with an IP stack. This identity is normally associated with, but not
limited to, an IP stack. A system can have multiple identities, some
\'well known\', some unpublished or \'anonymous\'. A system may
self-assert its own identity, or may use a third-party authenticator
like DNSSEC \[[RFC4033](#RFC4033){.xref}\], Pretty Good Privacy (PGP),
or X.509 to \'notarize\' the identity assertion to another
namespace.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

In theory, any name that can claim to be \'statistically globally
unique\' may serve as a Host Identifier. In the HIP architecture, the
public key of a private-public key pair has been chosen as the Host
Identifier because it can be self-managed and it is computationally
difficult to forge. As specified in the Host Identity Protocol
specification \[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\], a public-key-based HI can
authenticate the HIP packets and protect them from man-in-the-middle
(MitM) attacks. Since authenticated datagrams are mandatory to provide
much of HIP\'s denial-of-service protection, the Diffie-Hellman exchange
in HIP base exchange has to be authenticated. Thus, only public-key HI
and authenticated HIP messages are supported in
practice.[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}

In this document, some non-cryptographic forms of HI and HIP are
referenced, but cryptographic forms should be preferred because they are
more secure than their non-cryptographic counterparts. There has been
past research in challenge puzzles using non-cryptographic HI for Radio
Frequency IDentification (RFID), in an HIP exchange tailored to the
workings of such challenges (as described further in
\[[urien-rfid](#urien-rfid){.xref}\] and
\[[urien-rfid-draft](#I-D.irtf-hiprg-rfid){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Host Identifiers](#name-host-identifiers){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-host-identifiers}

Host Identity adds two main features to Internet protocols. The first is
a decoupling of the internetworking and transport layers; see [Section
5](#sec-architecture){.xref}. This decoupling will allow for independent
evolution of the two layers. Additionally, it can provide end-to-end
services over multiple internetworking realms. The second feature is
host authentication. Because the Host Identifier is a public key, this
key can be used for authentication in security protocols like
ESP.[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}

An identity is based on public-private key cryptography in HIP. The Host
Identity is referred to by its public component, the public key. Thus,
the name representing a Host Identity in the Host Identity namespace,
i.e., the Host Identifier, is the public key. In a way, the possession
of the private key defines the Identity itself. If the private key is
possessed by more than one node, the Identity can be considered to be a
distributed one.[¶](#section-4.1-2){.pilcrow}

Architecturally, any other Internet naming convention might form a
usable base for Host Identifiers. However, non-cryptographic names
should only be used in situations of high trust and/or low risk. That is
any place where host authentication is not needed (no risk of host
spoofing) and no use of ESP. However, at least for interconnected
networks spanning several operational domains, the set of environments
where the risk of host spoofing allowed by non-cryptographic Host
Identifiers is acceptable is the null set. Hence, the current HIP
documents do not specify how to use any other types of Host Identifiers
but public keys. For instance, the Back to My Mac service
\[[RFC6281](#RFC6281){.xref}\] from Apple comes pretty close to the
functionality of HIP, but unlike HIP, it is based on non-cryptographic
identifiers.[¶](#section-4.1-3){.pilcrow}

The actual Host Identifiers are never directly used at the transport or
network layers. The corresponding Host Identifiers (public keys) may be
stored in various DNS or other directories as identified elsewhere in
this document, and they are passed in the HIP base exchange. A Host
Identity Tag (HIT) is used in other protocols to represent the Host
Identity. Another representation of the Host Identities, the Local Scope
Identifier (LSI), can also be used in protocols and
APIs.[¶](#section-4.1-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.2 .section}
### [4.2.](#section-4.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Host Identity Hash (HIH)](#name-host-identity-hash-hih){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-host-identity-hash-hih}

The Host Identity Hash (HIH) is the cryptographic hash algorithm used in
producing the HIT from the HI. It is also the hash used throughout HIP
for consistency and simplicity. It is possible for the two hosts in the
HIP exchange to use different hash
algorithms.[¶](#section-4.2-1){.pilcrow}

Multiple HIHs within HIP are needed to address the moving target of
creation and eventual compromise of cryptographic hashes. This
significantly complicates HIP and offers an attacker an additional
downgrade attack that is mitigated in HIP
\[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.3 .section}
### [4.3.](#section-4.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Host Identity Tag (HIT)](#name-host-identity-tag-hit){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-host-identity-tag-hit}

A Host Identity Tag (HIT) is a 128-bit representation for a Host
Identity. Due to its size, it is suitable for use in the existing
sockets API in the place of IPv6 addresses (e.g., in sockaddr_in6
structure, sin6_addr member) without modifying applications. It is
created from an HIH, an IPv6 prefix \[[RFC7343](#RFC7343){.xref}\], and
a hash identifier. There are two advantages of using the HIT over using
the Host Identifier in protocols. First, its fixed length makes for
easier protocol coding and also better manages the packet size cost of
this technology. Second, it presents the identity in a consistent format
to the protocol independent of the cryptographic algorithms
used.[¶](#section-4.3-1){.pilcrow}

In essence, the HIT is a hash over the public key. As such, two
algorithms affect the generation of a HIT: the public-key algorithm of
the HI and the used HIH. The two algorithms are encoded in the bit
presentation of the HIT. As the two communicating parties may support
different algorithms, \[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\] defines the minimum
set for interoperability. For further interoperability, the Responder
may store its keys in DNS records, and thus the Initiator may have to
couple destination HITs with appropriate source HITs according to
matching HIH.[¶](#section-4.3-2){.pilcrow}

In the HIP packets, the HITs identify the sender and recipient of a
packet. Consequently, a HIT should be unique in the whole IP universe as
long as it is being used. In the extremely rare case of a single HIT
mapping to more than one Host Identity, the Host Identifiers (public
keys) will make the final difference. If there is more than one public
key for a given node, the HIT acts as a hint for the correct public key
to use.[¶](#section-4.3-3){.pilcrow}

Although it may be rare for an accidental collision to cause a single
HIT mapping to more than one Host Identity, it may be the case that an
attacker succeeds to find, by brute force or algorithmic weakness, a
second Host Identity hashing to the same HIT. This type of attack is
known as a preimage attack, and the resistance to finding a second Host
Identifier (public key) that hashes to the same HIT is called second
preimage resistance. Second preimage resistance in HIP is based on the
hash algorithm strength and the length of the hash output used. Through
HIPv2 \[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\], this resistance is 96 bits (less
than the 128-bit width of an IPv6 address field due to the presence of
the Overlay Routable Cryptographic Hash Identifiers (ORCHID) prefix
\[[RFC7343](#RFC7343){.xref}\]). 96 bits of resistance was considered
acceptable strength during the design of HIP but may eventually be
considered insufficient for the threat model of an envisioned
deployment. One possible mitigation would be to augment the use of HITs
in the deployment with the HIs themselves (and mechanisms to securely
bind the HIs to the HITs), so that the HI becomes the final authority.
It also may be possible to increase the difficulty of a brute force
attack by making the generation of the HI more computationally
difficult, such as the hash extension approach of Secure Neighbor
Discovery Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGAs)
\[[RFC3972](#RFC3972){.xref}\], although the HIP specifications through
HIPv2 do not provide such a mechanism. Finally, deployments that do not
use ORCHIDs (such as certain types of overlay networks) might also use
the full 128-bit width of an IPv6 address field for the
HIT.[¶](#section-4.3-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#lsi}
::: {#section-4.4 .section}
### [4.4.](#section-4.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Local Scope Identifier (LSI)](#name-local-scope-identifier-lsi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-local-scope-identifier-lsi}

An LSI is a 32-bit localized representation for a Host Identity. Due to
its size, it is suitable for use in the existing sockets API in the
place of IPv4 addresses (e.g., in sockaddr_in structure, sin_addr
member) without modifying applications. The purpose of an LSI is to
facilitate using Host Identities in existing APIs for IPv4-based
applications. LSIs are never transmitted on the wire; when an
application sends data using a pair of LSIs, the HIP layer (or sockets
handler) translates the LSIs to the corresponding HITs, and vice versa
for the receiving of data. Besides facilitating HIP-based connectivity
for legacy IPv4 applications, the LSIs are beneficial in two other
scenarios \[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4.4-1){.pilcrow}

In the first scenario, two IPv4-only applications reside on two separate
hosts connected by IPv6-only network. With HIP-based connectivity, the
two applications are able to communicate despite the mismatch in the
protocol families of the applications and the underlying network. The
reason is that the HIP layer translates the LSIs originating from the
upper layers into routable IPv6 locators before delivering the packets
on the wire.[¶](#section-4.4-2){.pilcrow}

The second scenario is the same as the first one, but with the
difference that one of the applications supports only IPv6. Now two
obstacles hinder the communication between the applications: the
addressing families of the two applications differ, and the application
residing at the IPv4-only side is again unable to communicate because of
the mismatch between addressing families of the application (IPv4) and
network (IPv6). With HIP-based connectivity for applications, this
scenario works; the HIP layer can choose whether to translate the
locator of an incoming packet into an LSI or
HIT.[¶](#section-4.4-3){.pilcrow}

Effectively, LSIs improve IPv6 interoperability at the network layer as
described in the first scenario and at the application layer as depicted
in the second example. The interoperability mechanism should not be used
to avoid transition to IPv6; the authors firmly believe in IPv6 adoption
and encourage developers to port existing IPv4-only applications to use
IPv6. However, some proprietary, closed-source, IPv4-only applications
may never see the daylight of IPv6, and the LSI mechanism is suitable
for extending the lifetime of such applications even in IPv6-only
networks.[¶](#section-4.4-4){.pilcrow}

The main disadvantage of an LSI is its local scope. Applications may
violate layering principles and pass LSIs to each other in
application-layer protocols. As the LSIs are valid only in the context
of the local host, they may represent an entirely different host when
passed to another host. However, it should be emphasized here that the
LSI concept is effectively a host-based NAT and does not introduce any
more issues than the prevalent middlebox-based NATs for IPv4. In other
words, the applications violating layering principles are already broken
by the NAT boxes that are ubiquitously
deployed.[¶](#section-4.4-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-4.5 .section}
### [4.5.](#section-4.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Storing Host Identifiers in Directories](#name-storing-host-identifiers-in){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-storing-host-identifiers-in}

The public Host Identifiers should be stored in DNS; the unpublished
Host Identifiers should not be stored anywhere (besides the
communicating hosts themselves). The (public) HI along with the
supported HIHs are stored in a new Resource Record (RR) type. This RR
type is defined in the [HIP DNS extension](#RFC8005){.xref}
\[[RFC8005](#RFC8005){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4.5-1){.pilcrow}

Alternatively, or in addition to storing Host Identifiers in the DNS,
they may be stored in various other directories. For instance, a
directory based on the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) or a
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) \[[RFC8002](#RFC8002){.xref}\] may be
used. Alternatively, [Distributed Hash Tables (DHTs)](#RFC6537){.xref}
\[[RFC6537](#RFC6537){.xref}\] have successfully been utilized
\[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\]. Such a practice may allow them to be
used for purposes other than pure host
identification.[¶](#section-4.5-2){.pilcrow}

Some types of applications may cache and use Host Identifiers directly,
while others may indirectly discover them through a symbolic host name
(such as a Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN)) look up from a directory.
Even though Host Identities can have a substantially longer lifetime
associated with them than routable IP addresses, directories may be a
better approach to manage the lifespan of Host Identities. For example,
an LDAP-based directory or DHT can be used for locally published
identities whereas DNS can be more suitable for public
advertisement.[¶](#section-4.5-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sec-architecture}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [New Stack Architecture](#name-new-stack-architecture){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-new-stack-architecture}

One way to characterize Host Identity is to compare the proposed
HI-based architecture with the current one. Using the terminology from
the [IRTF Name Space Research Group
Report](#I-D.irtf-nsrg-report){.xref}
\[[nsrg-report](#I-D.irtf-nsrg-report){.xref}\] and, e.g., the document
on [\"Endpoints and Endpoint Names\"](#chiappa-endpoints){.xref}
\[[chiappa-endpoints](#chiappa-endpoints){.xref}\], the IP addresses
currently embody the dual role of locators and endpoint identifiers.
That is, each IP address names a topological location in the Internet,
thereby acting as a routing direction vector, or locator. At the same
time, the IP address names the physical network interface currently
located at the point-of-attachment, thereby acting as an endpoint
name.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

In the HIP architecture, the endpoint names and locators are separated
from each other. IP addresses continue to act as locators. The Host
Identifiers take the role of endpoint identifiers. It is important to
understand that the endpoint names based on Host Identities are slightly
different from interface names; a Host Identity can be simultaneously
reachable through several interfaces.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}

The difference between the bindings of the logical entities are
illustrated in [Figure 1](#fig-1){.xref}. The left side illustrates the
current TCP/IP architecture and the right side the HIP-based
architecture.[¶](#section-5-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#fig-1}
::: {#section-5-4.1 .artwork .art-text .alignLeft}

    Transport ---- Socket                Transport ------ Socket
    association      |                   association        |
                     |                                      |
                     |                                      |
                     |                                      |
    Endpoint         |                     Endpoint --- Host Identity
             \       |                                      |
               \     |                                      |
                 \   |                                      |
                   \ |                                      |
    Location --- IP address                Location --- IP address
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}
:::

Architecturally, HIP provides for a different binding of transport-layer
protocols. That is, the transport-layer associations, i.e., TCP
connections and UDP associations, are no longer bound to IP addresses
but rather to Host Identities. In practice, the Host Identities are
exposed as LSIs and HITs for legacy applications and the transport layer
to facilitate backward compatibility with existing networking APIs and
stacks.[¶](#section-5-5){.pilcrow}

The HIP layer is logically located at Layer 3.5, between the transport
and network layers, in the networking stack. It acts as shim layer for
transport data utilizing LSIs or HITs but leaves other data intact. The
HIP layer translates between the two forms of HIP identifiers
originating from the transport layer into routable IPv4/IPv6 addresses
for the network layer and vice versa for the reverse
direction.[¶](#section-5-6){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [On the Multiplicity of Identities](#name-on-the-multiplicity-of-iden){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-on-the-multiplicity-of-iden}

A host may have multiple identities both at the client and server side.
This raises some additional concerns that are addressed in this
section.[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

For security reasons, it may be a bad idea to duplicate the same Host
Identity on multiple hosts because the compromise of a single host
taints the identities of the other hosts. Management of machines with
identical Host Identities may also present other challenges and,
therefore, it is advisable to have a unique identity for each
host.[¶](#section-5.1-2){.pilcrow}

At the server side, utilizing DNS is a better alternative than a shared
Host Identity to implement load balancing. A single FQDN entry can be
configured to refer to multiple Host Identities. Each of the FQDN
entries can be associated with the related locators or with a single
shared locator in the case the servers are using the same HIP rendezvous
server ([Section 6.3](#sec_rvz){.xref}) or HIP relay server ([Section
6.4](#sec_relay){.xref}).[¶](#section-5.1-3){.pilcrow}

Instead of duplicating identities, HIP opportunistic mode can be
employed, where the Initiator leaves out the identifier of the Responder
when initiating the key exchange and learns it upon the completion of
the exchange. The trade-offs are related to lowered security guarantees,
but a benefit of the approach is to avoid the publishing of Host
Identifiers in any directories \[[komu-leap](#komu-leap){.xref}\]. Since
many public servers already employ DNS as their directory, opportunistic
mode may be more suitable for, e.g., peer-to-peer connectivity. It is
also worth noting that opportunistic mode is also required in practice
when anycast IP addresses would be utilized as
locators.[¶](#section-5.1-4){.pilcrow}

HIP opportunistic mode could be utilized in association with HIP
rendezvous servers or HIP relay servers
\[[komu-diss](#komu-diss){.xref}\]. In such a scenario, the Initiator
sends an I1 message with a wildcard destination HIT to the locator of a
HIP rendezvous/relay server. When the receiving rendezvous/relay server
is serving multiple registered Responders, the server can choose the
ultimate destination HIT, thus acting as a HIP-based load balancer.
However, this approach is still experimental and requires further
investigation.[¶](#section-5.1-5){.pilcrow}

At the client side, a host may have multiple Host Identities, for
instance, for privacy purposes. Another reason can be that the person
utilizing the host employs different identities for different
administrative domains as an extra security measure. If a HIP-aware
middlebox, such as a HIP-based firewall, is on the path between the
client and server, the user or the underlying system should carefully
choose the correct identity to avoid the firewall unnecessarily dropping
HIP-based connectivity
\[[komu-diss](#komu-diss){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5.1-6){.pilcrow}

Similarly, a server may have multiple Host Identities. For instance, a
single web server may serve multiple different administrative domains.
Typically, the distinction is accomplished based on the DNS name, but
also the Host Identity could be used for this purpose. However, a more
compelling reason to employ multiple identities is the HIP-aware
firewall that is unable to see the HTTP traffic inside the encrypted
IPsec tunnel. In such a case, each service could be configured with a
separate identity, thus allowing the firewall to segregate the different
services of the single web server from each other
\[[lindqvist-enterprise](#lindqvist-enterprise){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5.1-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#control-plane}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Control Plane](#name-control-plane){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-control-plane}

HIP decouples the control and data planes from each other. Two end-hosts
initialize the control plane using a key exchange procedure called the
base exchange. The procedure can be assisted by HIP-specific
infrastructural intermediaries called rendezvous or relay servers. In
the event of IP address changes, the end-hosts sustain control plane
connectivity with mobility and multihoming extensions. Eventually, the
end-hosts terminate the control plane and remove the associated
state.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-6.1 .section}
### [6.1.](#section-6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Base Exchange](#name-base-exchange){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-base-exchange}

The base exchange is a key exchange procedure that authenticates the
Initiator and Responder to each other using their public keys.
Typically, the Initiator is the client-side host and the Responder is
the server-side host. The roles are used by the state machine of a HIP
implementation but then discarded upon successful
completion.[¶](#section-6.1-1){.pilcrow}

The exchange consists of four messages during which the hosts also
create symmetric keys to protect the control plane with Hash-based
Message Authentication Codes (HMACs). The keys can be also used to
protect the data plane, and IPsec ESP \[[RFC7402](#RFC7402){.xref}\] is
typically used as the data plane protocol, albeit HIP can also
accommodate others. Both the control and data planes are terminated
using a closing procedure consisting of two
messages.[¶](#section-6.1-2){.pilcrow}

In addition, the base exchange also includes a computational puzzle
\[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\] that the Initiator must solve. The
Responder chooses the difficulty of the puzzle, which permits the
Responder to delay new incoming Initiators according to local policies,
for instance, when the Responder is under heavy load. The puzzle can
offer some resiliency against DoS attacks because the design of the
puzzle mechanism allows the Responder to remain stateless until the very
end of the base exchange \[[aura-dos](#aura-dos){.xref}\]. HIP puzzles
have also been studied under steady-state DDoS attacks
\[[beal-dos](#beal-dos){.xref}\], on multiple adversary models with
varying puzzle difficulties
\[[tritilanunt-dos](#tritilanunt-dos){.xref}\], and with ephemeral Host
Identities
\[[komu-mitigation](#komu-mitigation){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-6.2 .section}
### [6.2.](#section-6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [End-Host Mobility and Multihoming](#name-end-host-mobility-and-multi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-end-host-mobility-and-multi}

HIP decouples the transport from the internetworking layer and binds the
transport associations to the Host Identities (actually through either
the HIT or LSI). After the initial key exchange, the HIP layer maintains
transport-layer connectivity and data flows using its extensions for
[mobility](#RFC8046){.xref} \[[RFC8046](#RFC8046){.xref}\] and
[multihoming](#RFC8047){.xref} \[[RFC8047](#RFC8047){.xref}\].
Consequently, HIP can provide for a degree of internetworking mobility
and multihoming at a low infrastructure cost. HIP mobility includes IP
address changes (via any method) to either party. Thus, a system is
considered mobile if its IP address can change dynamically for any
reason like PPP, DHCP, IPv6 prefix reassignments, or a NAT device
remapping its translation. Likewise, a system is considered multihomed
if it has more than one globally routable IP address at the same time.
HIP links IP addresses together when multiple IP addresses correspond to
the same Host Identity. If one address becomes unusable, or a more
preferred address becomes available, existing transport associations can
easily be moved to another address.[¶](#section-6.2-1){.pilcrow}

When a mobile node moves while communication is ongoing, address changes
are rather straightforward. The mobile node sends a HIP UPDATE packet to
inform the peer of the new address(es), and the peer then verifies that
the mobile node is reachable through these addresses. This way, the peer
can avoid flooding attacks as further discussed in [Section
11.2](#ssec-flooding){.xref}.[¶](#section-6.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#sec_rvz}
::: {#section-6.3 .section}
### [6.3.](#section-6.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Rendezvous Mechanism](#name-rendezvous-mechanism){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-rendezvous-mechanism}

Establishing a contact to a mobile, moving node is slightly more
involved. In order to start the HIP exchange, the Initiator node has to
know how to reach the mobile node. For instance, the mobile node can
employ Dynamic DNS \[[RFC2136](#RFC2136){.xref}\] to update its
reachability information in the DNS. To avoid the dependency to DNS, HIP
provides its own HIP-specific alternative: the HIP rendezvous mechanism
as defined in the [HIP rendezvous specification](#RFC8004){.xref}
\[[RFC8004](#RFC8004){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.3-1){.pilcrow}

Using the HIP rendezvous extensions, the mobile node keeps the
rendezvous infrastructure continuously updated with its current IP
address(es). The mobile nodes trusts the rendezvous mechanism in order
to properly maintain their HIT and IP address
mappings.[¶](#section-6.3-2){.pilcrow}

The rendezvous mechanism is especially useful in scenarios where both of
the nodes are expected to change their address at the same time. In such
a case, the HIP UPDATE packets will cross each other in the network and
never reach the peer node.[¶](#section-6.3-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sec_relay}
::: {#section-6.4 .section}
### [6.4.](#section-6.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Relay Mechanism](#name-relay-mechanism){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-relay-mechanism}

The HIP relay mechanism \[[RFC9028](#RFC9028){.xref}\] is an alternative
to the HIP rendezvous mechanism. The HIP relay mechanism is more
suitable for IPv4 networks with NATs because a HIP relay can forward all
control and data plane communications in order to guarantee successful
NAT traversal.[¶](#section-6.4-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6.5 .section}
### [6.5.](#section-6.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Termination of the Control Plane](#name-termination-of-the-control-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-termination-of-the-control-}

The control plane between two hosts is terminated using a secure
two-message exchange as specified in [base exchange
specification](#RFC7401){.xref} \[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\]. The
related state (i.e., host associations) should be removed upon
successful termination.[¶](#section-6.5-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#esp}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Data Plane](#name-data-plane){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-data-plane}

The encapsulation format for the data plane used for carrying the
application-layer traffic can be dynamically negotiated during the key
exchange. For instance, [HICCUPS extensions](#RFC6078){.xref}
\[[RFC6078](#RFC6078){.xref}\] define one way to transport
application-layer datagrams directly over the HIP control plane,
protected by asymmetric key cryptography. Also, Secure Real-time
Transport Protocol (SRTP) has been considered as the data encapsulation
protocol \[[hip-srtp](#I-D.tschofenig-hiprg-hip-srtp){.xref}\]. However,
the most widely implemented method is the Encapsulated Security Payload
(ESP) \[[RFC7402](#RFC7402){.xref}\] that is protected by symmetric keys
derived during the key exchange. ESP Security Associations (SAs) offer
both confidentiality and integrity protection, of which the former can
be disabled during the key exchange. In the future, other ways of
transporting application-layer data may be
defined.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

The ESP SAs are established and terminated between the Initiator and the
Responder hosts. Usually, the hosts create at least two SAs, one in each
direction (Initiator-to-Responder SA and Responder-to-Initiator SA). If
the IP addresses of either host changes, the HIP mobility extensions can
be used to renegotiate the corresponding SAs.[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}

On the wire, the difference in the use of identifiers between the HIP
control and data planes is that the HITs are included in all control
packets, but not in the data plane when ESP is employed. Instead, the
ESP employs Security Parameter Index (SPI) numbers that act as
compressed HITs. Any HIP-aware middlebox (for instance, a HIP-aware
firewall) interested in the ESP-based data plane should keep track
between the control and data plane identifiers in order to associate
them with each other.[¶](#section-7-3){.pilcrow}

Since HIP does not negotiate any SA lifetimes, all lifetimes are subject
to local policy. The only lifetimes a HIP implementation must support
are sequence number rollover (for replay protection) and SA timeout. An
SA times out if no packets are received using that SA. Implementations
may support lifetimes for the various ESP transforms and other data
plane protocols.[¶](#section-7-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#nat}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [HIP and NATs](#name-hip-and-nats){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-hip-and-nats}

Passing packets between different IP addressing realms requires changing
IP addresses in the packet header. This may occur, for example, when a
packet is passed between the public Internet and a private address
space, or between IPv4 and IPv6 networks. The address translation is
usually implemented as [Network Address Translation
(NAT)](#RFC3022){.xref} \[[RFC3022](#RFC3022){.xref}\] or the historic
[NAT Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)](#RFC2766){.xref}
\[[RFC2766](#RFC2766){.xref}\].[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

In a network environment where identification is based on the IP
addresses, identifying the communicating nodes is difficult when NATs
are employed because private address spaces are overlapping. In other
words, two hosts cannot be distinguished from each other solely based on
their IP addresses. With HIP, the transport-layer endpoints (i.e.,
applications) are bound to unique Host Identities rather than
overlapping private addresses. This allows two endpoints to distinguish
one other even when they are located in different private address
realms. Thus, the IP addresses are used only for routing purposes and
can be changed freely by NATs when a packet between two HIP-capable
hosts traverses through multiple private address
realms.[¶](#section-8-2){.pilcrow}

[NAT traversal extensions for HIP](#RFC9028){.xref}
\[[RFC9028](#RFC9028){.xref}\] can be used to realize the actual
end-to-end connectivity through NAT devices. To support basic backward
compatibility with legacy NATs, the extensions encapsulate both HIP
control and data planes in UDP. The extensions define mechanisms for
forwarding the two planes through an intermediary host called HIP relay
and procedures to establish direct end-to-end connectivity by
penetrating NATs. Besides this \"native\" NAT traversal mode for HIP,
other NAT traversal mechanisms have been successfully utilized, such as
Teredo \[[RFC4380](#RFC4380){.xref}\] (as described in further detail in
\[[varjonen-split](#varjonen-split){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-8-3){.pilcrow}

Besides legacy NATs, a HIP-aware NAT has been designed and implemented
\[[ylitalo-spinat](#ylitalo-spinat){.xref}\]. For a HIP-based flow, a
HIP-aware NAT or HIP-aware historic NAT-PT system tracks the mapping of
HITs, and the corresponding ESP SPIs, to an IP address. The NAT system
has to learn mappings both from HITs and from SPIs to IP addresses. Many
HITs (and SPIs) can map to a single IP address on a NAT, simplifying
connections on address-poor NAT interfaces. The NAT can gain much of its
knowledge from the HIP packets themselves; however, some NAT
configuration may be necessary.[¶](#section-8-4){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-8.1 .section}
### [8.1.](#section-8.1){.section-number .selfRef} [HIP and Upper-Layer Checksums](#name-hip-and-upper-layer-checksu){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-hip-and-upper-layer-checksu}

There is no way for a host to know if any of the IP addresses in an IP
header are the addresses used to calculate the TCP checksum. That is, it
is not feasible to calculate the TCP checksum using the actual IP
addresses in the pseudo header; the addresses received in the incoming
packet are not necessarily the same as they were on the sending host.
Furthermore, it is not possible to recompute the upper-layer checksums
in the NAT/NAT-PT system, since the traffic is ESP protected.
Consequently, the TCP and UDP checksums are calculated using the HITs in
the place of the IP addresses in the pseudo header. Furthermore, only
the IPv6 pseudo header format is used. This provides for IPv4 / IPv6
protocol translation.[¶](#section-8.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Multicast](#name-multicast){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-multicast}

A number of studies investigating HIP-based multicast have been
published (including \[[shields-hip](#shields-hip){.xref}\],
\[[zhu-hip](#zhu-hip){.xref}\], \[[amir-hip](#amir-hip){.xref}\],
\[[kovacshazi-host](#kovacshazi-host){.xref}\], and
\[[zhu-secure](#zhu-secure){.xref}\]). In particular, so-called Bloom
filters, which allow the compression of multiple labels into small data
structures, may be a promising way forward
\[[sarela-bloom](#sarela-bloom){.xref}\]. However, the different schemes
have not been adopted by the HIP working group (nor the HIP research
group in the IRTF), so the details are not further elaborated
here.[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [HIP Policies](#name-hip-policies){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-hip-policies}

There are a number of variables that influence the HIP exchange that
each host must support. All HIP implementations should support at least
two HIs, one to publish in DNS or a similar directory service and an
unpublished one for anonymous usage (that should expect to be rotated
frequently in order to disrupt linkability and/or trackability).
Although unpublished HIs will rarely be used as Responder HIs, they are
likely to be common for Initiators. As stated in
\[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\], \"all HIP implementations [MUST]{.bcp14}
support more than one simultaneous HI, at least one of which
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} be reserved for anonymous usage\", and \"support for
more than two HIs is [RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\". This provides new
challenges for systems or users to decide which type of HI to expose
when they start a new session.[¶](#section-10-1){.pilcrow}

Opportunistic mode (where the Initiator starts a HIP exchange without
prior knowledge of the Responder\'s HI) presents a security trade-off.
At the expense of being subject to MitM attacks, the opportunistic mode
allows the Initiator to learn the identity of the Responder during
communication rather than from an external directory. Opportunistic mode
can be used for registration to HIP-based services
\[[RFC8003](#RFC8003){.xref}\] (i.e., utilized by HIP for its own
internal purposes) or by the application layer
\[[komu-leap](#komu-leap){.xref}\]. For security reasons, especially the
latter requires some involvement from the user to accept the identity of
the Responder similar to how the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol prompts the
user when connecting to a server for the first time
\[[pham-leap](#pham-leap){.xref}\]. In practice, this can be realized in
end-host-based firewalls in the case of legacy applications
\[[karvonen-usable](#karvonen-usable){.xref}\] or with [native APIs for
HIP APIs](#RFC6317){.xref} \[[RFC6317](#RFC6317){.xref}\] in the case of
HIP-aware applications.[¶](#section-10-2){.pilcrow}

As stated in \[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-10-3){.pilcrow}

> Initiators [MAY]{.bcp14} use a different HI for different Responders
> to provide basic privacy. Whether such private HIs are used repeatedly
> with the same Responder, and how long these HIs are used, are decided
> by local policy and depend on the privacy requirements of the
> Initiator.[¶](#section-10-4){.pilcrow}

According to \[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-10-5){.pilcrow}

> Responders that only respond to selected Initiators require an Access
> Control List (ACL), representing for which hosts they accept HIP base
> exchanges, and the preferred transport format and local lifetimes.
> Wildcarding [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be supported for such ACLs, and also for
> Responders that offer public or anonymous
> services.[¶](#section-10-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-11 .section}
## [11.](#section-11){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

This section includes discussion on some issues and solutions related to
security in the HIP architecture.[¶](#section-11-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-11.1 .section}
### [11.1.](#section-11.1){.section-number .selfRef} [MitM Attacks](#name-mitm-attacks){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-mitm-attacks}

HIP takes advantage of the Host Identity paradigm to provide secure
authentication of hosts and to provide a fast key exchange for ESP. HIP
also attempts to limit the exposure of the host to various
denial-of-service (DoS) and man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks. In so
doing, HIP itself is subject to its own DoS and MitM attacks that
potentially could be more damaging to a host\'s ability to conduct
business as usual.[¶](#section-11.1-1){.pilcrow}

Resource exhausting DoS attacks take advantage of the cost of setting up
a state for a protocol on the Responder compared to the \'cheapness\' on
the Initiator. HIP allows a Responder to increase the cost of the start
of state on the Initiator and makes an effort to reduce the cost to the
Responder. This is done by having the Responder start the authenticated
Diffie-Hellman exchange instead of the Initiator, making the HIP base
exchange four packets long. The first packet sent by the Responder can
be prebuilt to further mitigate the costs. This packet also includes a
computational puzzle that can optionally be used to further delay the
Initiator, for instance, when the Responder is overloaded. The details
are explained in the [base exchange specification](#RFC7401){.xref}
\[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\].[¶](#section-11.1-2){.pilcrow}

MitM attacks are difficult to defend against without third-party
authentication. A skillful MitM could easily handle all parts of the HIP
base exchange, but HIP indirectly provides the following protection from
a MitM attack. If the Responder\'s HI is retrieved from a signed DNS
zone or securely obtained by some other means, the Initiator can use
this to authenticate the signed HIP packets. Likewise, if the
Initiator\'s HI is in a secure DNS zone, the Responder can retrieve it
and validate the signed HIP packets. However, since an Initiator may
choose to use an unpublished HI, it knowingly risks a MitM attack. The
Responder may choose not to accept a HIP exchange with an Initiator
using an unknown HI.[¶](#section-11.1-3){.pilcrow}

Other types of MitM attacks against HIP can be mounted using ICMP
messages that can be used to signal about problems. As an overall
guideline, the ICMP messages should be considered as unreliable
\"hints\" and should be acted upon only after timeouts. The exact attack
scenarios and countermeasures are described in full detail in the [base
exchange specification](#RFC7401){.xref}
\[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\].[¶](#section-11.1-4){.pilcrow}

A MitM attacker could try to replay older I1 or R1 messages using weaker
cryptographic algorithms as described in [Section
4.1.4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7401#section-4.1.4){.relref} of
\[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\]. The base exchange has been augmented to
deal with such an attack by restarting on the detection of the attack.
At worst, this would only lead to a situation in which the base exchange
would never finish (or would be aborted after some retries). As a
drawback, this leads to a six-way base exchange, which may seem bad at
first. However, since this only occurs in an attack scenario and since
the attack can be handled (so it is not interesting to mount anymore),
we assume the subsequent messages do not represent a security threat.
Since the MitM cannot be successful with a downgrade attack, these sorts
of attacks will only occur as \'nuisance\' attacks. So, the base
exchange would still be usually just four packets even though
implementations must be prepared to protect themselves against the
downgrade attack.[¶](#section-11.1-5){.pilcrow}

In HIP, the Security Association for ESP is indexed by the SPI; the
source address is always ignored, and the destination address may be
ignored as well. Therefore, HIP-enabled ESP is IP address independent.
This might seem to make attacking easier, but ESP with replay protection
is already as well protected as possible, and the removal of the IP
address as a check should not increase the exposure of ESP to DoS
attacks.[¶](#section-11.1-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#ssec-flooding}
::: {#section-11.2 .section}
### [11.2.](#section-11.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Protection against Flooding Attacks](#name-protection-against-flooding){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-protection-against-flooding}

Although the idea of informing about address changes by simply sending
packets with a new source address appears appealing, it is not secure
enough. That is, even if HIP does not rely on the source address for
anything (once the base exchange has been completed), it appears to be
necessary to check a mobile node\'s reachability at the new address
before actually sending any larger amounts of traffic to the new
address.[¶](#section-11.2-1){.pilcrow}

Blindly accepting new addresses would potentially lead to flooding DoS
attacks against third parties \[[RFC4225](#RFC4225){.xref}\]. In a
distributed flooding attack, an attacker opens high-volume HIP
connections with a large number of hosts (using unpublished HIs) and
then claims to all of these hosts that it has moved to a target node\'s
IP address. If the peer hosts were to simply accept the move, the result
would be a packet flood to the target node\'s address. To prevent this
type of attack, HIP mobility extensions include a return routability
check procedure where the reachability of a node is separately checked
at each address before using the address for larger amounts of
traffic.[¶](#section-11.2-2){.pilcrow}

A credit-based authorization approach for \"[Host Mobility with the Host
Identity Protocol](#RFC8046){.xref}\" \[[RFC8046](#RFC8046){.xref}\] can
be used between hosts for sending data prior to completing the address
tests. Otherwise, if HIP is used between two hosts that fully trust each
other, the hosts may optionally decide to skip the address tests.
However, such performance optimization must be restricted to peers that
are known to be trustworthy and capable of protecting themselves from
malicious software.[¶](#section-11.2-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-11.3 .section}
### [11.3.](#section-11.3){.section-number .selfRef} [HITs Used in ACLs](#name-hits-used-in-acls){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-hits-used-in-acls}

At end-hosts, HITs can be used in IP-based access control lists at the
application and network layers. At middleboxes, HIP-aware firewalls
\[[lindqvist-enterprise](#lindqvist-enterprise){.xref}\] can use HITs or
public keys to control both ingress and egress access to networks or
individual hosts, even in the presence of mobile devices because the
HITs and public keys are topology independent. As discussed earlier in
[Section 7](#esp){.xref}, once a HIP session has been established, the
SPI value in an ESP packet may be used as an index, indicating the HITs.
In practice, firewalls can inspect HIP packets to learn of the bindings
between HITs, SPI values, and IP addresses. They can even explicitly
control ESP usage, dynamically opening ESP only for specific SPI values
and IP addresses. The signatures in HIP packets allow a capable firewall
to ensure that the HIP exchange is indeed occurring between two known
hosts. This may increase firewall
security.[¶](#section-11.3-1){.pilcrow}

A potential drawback of HITs in ACLs is their \'flatness\', which means
they cannot be aggregated, and this could potentially result in larger
table searches in HIP-aware firewalls. A way to optimize this could be
to utilize Bloom filters for grouping HITs
\[[sarela-bloom](#sarela-bloom){.xref}\]. However, it should be noted
that it is also easier to exclude individual, misbehaving hosts when the
firewall rules concern individual HITs rather than
groups.[¶](#section-11.3-2){.pilcrow}

There has been considerable bad experience with distributed ACLs that
contain material related to public keys, for example, with SSH. If the
owner of a key needs to revoke it for any reason, the task of finding
all locations where the key is held in an ACL may be impossible. If the
reason for the revocation is due to private key theft, this could be a
serious issue.[¶](#section-11.3-3){.pilcrow}

A host can keep track of all of its partners that might use its HIT in
an ACL by logging all remote HITs. It should only be necessary to log
Responder hosts. With this information, the host can notify the various
hosts about the change to the HIT. There have been attempts to develop a
secure method to issue the HIT revocation notice
\[[zhang-revocation](#I-D.irtf-hiprg-revocation){.xref}\].[¶](#section-11.3-4){.pilcrow}

Some of the HIP-aware middleboxes, such as firewalls
\[[lindqvist-enterprise](#lindqvist-enterprise){.xref}\] or NATs
\[[ylitalo-spinat](#ylitalo-spinat){.xref}\], may observe the on-path
traffic passively. Such middleboxes are transparent by their nature and
may not get a notification when a host moves to a different network.
Thus, such middleboxes should maintain soft state and time out when the
control and data planes between two HIP end-hosts have been idle too
long. Correspondingly, the two end-hosts may send periodically
keepalives, such as UPDATE packets or ICMP messages inside the ESP
tunnel, to sustain state at the on-path
middleboxes.[¶](#section-11.3-5){.pilcrow}

One general limitation related to end-to-end encryption is that
middleboxes may not be able to participate in the protection of data
flows. While the issue may also affect other protocols, Heer et al.
\[[heer-end-host](#heer-end-host){.xref}\] have analyzed the problem in
the context of HIP. More specifically, when ESP is used as the data
plane protocol for HIP, the association between the control and data
planes is weak and can be exploited under certain assumptions. In the
scenario, the attacker has already gained access to the target network
protected by a HIP-aware firewall, but wants to circumvent the HIP-based
firewall. To achieve this, the attacker passively observes a base
exchange between two HIP hosts and later replays it. This way, the
attacker manages to penetrate the firewall and can use a fake ESP tunnel
to transport its own data. This is possible because the firewall cannot
distinguish when the ESP tunnel is valid. As a solution, HIP-aware
middleboxes may participate in the control plane interaction by adding
random nonce parameters to the control traffic, which the end-hosts have
to sign to guarantee the freshness of the control traffic
\[[heer-midauth](#I-D.heer-hip-middle-auth){.xref}\]. As an alternative,
extensions for transporting the data plane directly over the control
plane can be used
\[[RFC6078](#RFC6078){.xref}\].[¶](#section-11.3-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-11.4 .section}
### [11.4.](#section-11.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Alternative HI Considerations](#name-alternative-hi-consideratio){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-alternative-hi-consideratio}

The definition of the Host Identifier states that the HI need not be a
public key. It implies that the HI could be any value, for example, a
FQDN. This document does not describe how to support such a
non-cryptographic HI, but examples of such protocol variants do exist
(\[[urien-rfid](#urien-rfid){.xref}\],
\[[urien-rfid-draft](#I-D.irtf-hiprg-rfid){.xref}\]). A
non-cryptographic HI would still offer the services of the HIT or LSI
for NAT traversal. It would be possible to carry HITs in HIP packets
that had neither privacy nor authentication. Such schemes may be
employed for resource-constrained devices, such as small sensors
operating on battery power, but are not further analyzed
here.[¶](#section-11.4-1){.pilcrow}

If it is desirable to use HIP in a low-security situation where public
key computations are considered expensive, HIP can be used with very
short Diffie-Hellman and Host Identity keys. Such use makes the
participating hosts vulnerable to MitM and connection hijacking attacks.
However, it does not cause flooding dangers, since the address check
mechanism relies on the routing system and not on cryptographic
strength.[¶](#section-11.4-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-11.5 .section}
### [11.5.](#section-11.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Trust on First Use](#name-trust-on-first-use){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-trust-on-first-use}

\[[RFC7435](#RFC7435){.xref}\] highlights four design principles for
Leap of Faith, or Trust On First Use (TOFU), protocols that apply also
to opportunistic HIP:[¶](#section-11.5-1){.pilcrow}

1.  [Coexist with explicit
    policy[¶](#section-11.5-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-11.5-2.1}
2.  [Prioritize
    communication[¶](#section-11.5-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-11.5-2.2}
3.  [Maximize security peer by
    peer[¶](#section-11.5-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-11.5-2.3}
4.  [No misrepresentation of
    security[¶](#section-11.5-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-11.5-2.4}

According to the first TOFU design principle, \"Opportunistic security
never displaces or preempts explicit policy\". Some application data may
be too sensitive, so the related policy could require authentication
(i.e., the public key or certificate) in such a case instead of the
unauthenticated opportunistic mode. In practice, this has been realized
in HIP implementations as follows
\[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\].[¶](#section-11.5-3){.pilcrow}

The OpenHIP implementation allowed an Initiator to use opportunistic
mode only with an explicitly configured Responder IP address, when the
Responder\'s HIT is unknown. At the Responder, OpenHIP had an option to
allow opportunistic mode with any Initiator \-- trust any
Initiator.[¶](#section-11.5-4){.pilcrow}

HIP for Linux (HIPL) developers experimented with more fine-grained
policies operating at the application level. The HIPL implementation
utilized so-called \"LD_PRELOAD\" hooking at the application layer that
allowed a dynamically linked library to intercept socket-related calls
without rebuilding the related application binaries. The library acted
as a shim layer between the application and transport layers. The shim
layer translated the non-HIP-based socket calls from the application
into HIP-based socket calls. While the shim library involved some level
of complexity as described in more detail in
\[[komu-leap](#komu-leap){.xref}\], it achieved the goal of applying
opportunistic mode at the granularity of individual
applications.[¶](#section-11.5-5){.pilcrow}

The second TOFU principle essentially states that communication should
prioritized over security. So opportunistic mode should be, in general,
allowed even if no authentication is present, and even possibly a
fallback to unencrypted communications could be allowed (if policy
permits) instead of blocking communications. In practice, this can be
realized in three steps. In the first step, a HIP Initiator can look up
the HI of a Responder from a directory such as DNS. When the Initiator
discovers a HI, it can use the HI for authentication and skip the rest
of the following steps. In the second step, the Initiator can, upon
failing to find a HI, try opportunistic mode with the Responder. In the
third step, the Initiator can fall back to non-HIP-based communications
upon failing with opportunistic mode if the policy allows it. This
three-step model has been implemented successfully and described in more
detail in
\[[komu-leap](#komu-leap){.xref}\].[¶](#section-11.5-6){.pilcrow}

The third TOFU principle suggests that security should be maximized, so
that at least opportunistic security would be employed. The three-step
model described earlier prefers authentication when it is available,
e.g., via DNS records (and possibly even via DNSSEC when available) and
falls back to opportunistic mode when no out-of-band credentials are
available. As the last resort, fallback to non-HIP-based communications
can be used if the policy allows it. Also, since perfect forward secrecy
(PFS) is explicitly mentioned in the third design principle, it is worth
mentioning that HIP supports it.[¶](#section-11.5-7){.pilcrow}

The fourth TOFU principle states that users and noninteractive
applications should be properly informed about the level of security
being applied. In practice, non-HIP-aware applications would assume that
no extra security is being applied, so misleading at least a
noninteractive application should not be possible. In the case of
interactive desktop applications, system-level prompts have been
utilized in earlier HIP experiments
\[[karvonen-usable](#karvonen-usable){.xref}\]
\[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\] to guide the user about the underlying
HIP-based security. In general, users in those experiments perceived
when HIP-based security was being used versus not used. However, the
users failed to notice the difference between opportunistic,
non-authenticated HIP and non-opportunistic, authenticated HIP. The
reason for this was that the opportunistic HIP (i.e., lowered level of
security) was not clearly indicated in the prompt. This provided a
valuable lesson to further improve the user
interface.[¶](#section-11.5-8){.pilcrow}

In the case of HIP-aware applications, native sockets APIs for HIP as
specified in \[[RFC6317](#RFC6317){.xref}\] can be used to develop
application-specific logic instead of using generic system-level
prompting. In such a case, the application itself can directly prompt
the user or otherwise manage the situation in other ways. In this case,
noninteractive applications also can properly log the level of security
being employed because the developer can now explicitly program the use
of authenticated HIP, opportunistic HIP, and plain-text
communication.[¶](#section-11.5-9){.pilcrow}

It is worth mentioning a few additional items discussed in
\[[RFC7435](#RFC7435){.xref}\]. Related to active attacks, HIP has
built-in protection against ciphersuite downgrade attacks as described
in detail in \[[RFC7401](#RFC7401){.xref}\]. In addition, pre-deployed
certificates could be used to mitigate against active attacks in the
case of opportunistic mode as mentioned in
\[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\].[¶](#section-11.5-10){.pilcrow}

Detection of peer capabilities is also mentioned in the TOFU context. As
discussed in this section, the three-step model can be used to detect
peer capabilities. A host can achieve the first step of authentication,
i.e., discovery of a public key, via DNS, for instance. If the host
finds no keys, the host can then try opportunistic mode as the second
step. Upon a timeout, the host can then proceed to the third step by
falling back to non-HIP-based communications if the policy permits. This
last step is based on an implicit timeout rather an explicit (negative)
acknowledgment like in the case of DNS, so the user may conclude
prematurely that the connectivity has failed. To speed up the detection
phase by explicitly detecting if the peer supports opportunistic HIP,
researchers have proposed TCP-specific extensions
\[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\] \[[komu-leap](#komu-leap){.xref}\]. In a
nutshell, an Initiator sends simultaneously both an opportunistic I1
packet and the related TCP SYN datagram equipped with a special TCP
option to a peer. If the peer supports HIP, it drops the SYN packet and
responds with an R1. If the peer is HIP incapable, it drops the HIP
packet (and the unknown TCP option) and responds with a TCP SYN-ACK. The
benefit of the proposed scheme is a faster, one round-trip fallback to
non-HIP-based communications. The drawback is that the approach is tied
to TCP (IP options were also considered, but do not work well with
firewalls and NATs). Naturally, the approach does not work against an
active attacker, but opportunistic mode is not supposed to protect
against such an adversary anyway.[¶](#section-11.5-11){.pilcrow}

It is worth noting that while the use of opportunistic mode has some
benefits related to incremental deployment, it does not achieve all the
benefits of authenticated HIP \[[komu-diss](#komu-diss){.xref}\].
Namely, authenticated HIP supports persistent identifiers in the sense
that hosts are identified with the same HI independent of their
movement. Opportunistic HIP meets this goal only partially: after the
first contact between two hosts, HIP can successfully sustain
connectivity with its mobility management extensions, but problems
emerge when the hosts close the HIP association and try to reestablish
connectivity. As hosts can change their location, it is no longer
guaranteed that the same IP address belongs to the same host. The same
address can be temporally assigned to different hosts, e.g., due to the
reuse of IP addresses (e.g., by a DHCP service), the overlapping of
private address realms (see also the discussion on Internet transparency
in [Appendix A.1](#sec_benefits){.xref}), or due to an attempted
attack.[¶](#section-11.5-12){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-12 .section}
## [12.](#section-12){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-12-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-13 .section}
## [13.](#section-13){.section-number .selfRef} [Changes from RFC 4423](#name-changes-from-rfc-4423){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-changes-from-rfc-4423}

In a nutshell, the changes from [RFC 4423](#RFC4423){.xref}
\[[RFC4423](#RFC4423){.xref}\] are mostly editorial, including
clarifications on topics described in a difficult way and omitting some
of the non-architectural (implementation) details that are already
described in other documents. A number of missing references to the
literature were also added. New topics include the drawbacks of HIP, a
discussion on 802.15.4 and MAC security, HIP for IoT scenarios,
deployment considerations, and a description of the base
exchange.[¶](#section-13-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-14 .section}
## [14.](#section-14){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-14.1 .section}
### [14.1.](#section-14.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC5482\]
:   [Eggert, L.]{.refAuthor} and [F. Gont]{.refAuthor}, [\"TCP User
    Timeout Option\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5482]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5482]{.seriesInfo}, March 2009,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5482>\>.
:   

\[RFC6079\]
:   [Camarillo, G.]{.refAuthor}, [Nikander, P.]{.refAuthor},
    [Hautakorpi, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Keranen, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [A.
    Johnston]{.refAuthor}, [\"HIP BONE: Host Identity Protocol (HIP)
    Based Overlay Networking Environment (BONE)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6079]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6079]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2011, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6079>\>.
:   

\[RFC7086\]
:   [Keranen, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Camarillo, G.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.
    Maenpaa]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host Identity Protocol-Based Overlay
    Networking Environment (HIP BONE) Instance Specification for
    REsource LOcation And Discovery (RELOAD)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7086]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7086]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2014, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7086>\>.
:   

\[RFC7343\]
:   [Laganier, J.]{.refAuthor} and [F. Dupont]{.refAuthor}, [\"An IPv6
    Prefix for Overlay Routable Cryptographic Hash Identifiers Version 2
    (ORCHIDv2)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7343]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7343]{.seriesInfo}, September 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7343>\>.
:   

\[RFC7401\]
:   [Moskowitz, R., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Heer, T.]{.refAuthor},
    [Jokela, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [T. Henderson]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host
    Identity Protocol Version 2 (HIPv2)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7401]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7401]{.seriesInfo}, April 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7401>\>.
:   

\[RFC7402\]
:   [Jokela, P.]{.refAuthor}, [Moskowitz, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.
    Melen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using the Encapsulating Security Payload
    (ESP) Transport Format with the Host Identity Protocol
    (HIP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7402]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7402]{.seriesInfo}, April 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7402>\>.
:   

\[RFC8002\]
:   [Heer, T.]{.refAuthor} and [S. Varjonen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host
    Identity Protocol Certificates\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8002]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8002]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2016, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8002>\>.
:   

\[RFC8003\]
:   [Laganier, J.]{.refAuthor} and [L. Eggert]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host
    Identity Protocol (HIP) Registration Extension\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8003]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8003]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2016, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8003>\>.
:   

\[RFC8004\]
:   [Laganier, J.]{.refAuthor} and [L. Eggert]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host
    Identity Protocol (HIP) Rendezvous Extension\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8004]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8004]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2016, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8004>\>.
:   

\[RFC8005\]
:   [Laganier, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host Identity Protocol (HIP) Domain
    Name System (DNS) Extension\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8005]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC8005]{.seriesInfo}, October 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8005>\>.
:   

\[RFC8046\]
:   [Henderson, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Vogt, C.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.
    Arkko]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host Mobility with the Host Identity
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8046]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8046]{.seriesInfo}, February 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8046>\>.
:   

\[RFC8047\]
:   [Henderson, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Vogt, C.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.
    Arkko]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host Multihoming with the Host Identity
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8047]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8047]{.seriesInfo}, February 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8047>\>.
:   

\[RFC9028\]
:   [Keränen, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Melén, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [M. Komu,
    Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Native NAT Traversal Mode for the Host Identity
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 9028]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC9028]{.seriesInfo}, July 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9028>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-14.2 .section}
### [14.2.](#section-14.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[amir-hip\]
:   [Amir, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Forsgren, H.]{.refAuthor},
    [Grahn, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Karvi, T.]{.refAuthor}, and [G.
    Pulkkis]{.refAuthor}, [\"Security and Trust of Public Key
    Cryptography for HIP and HIP Multicast\"]{.refTitle}, [International
    Journal of Dependable and Trustworthy Information Systems (IJDTIS),
    Vol. 2, Issue 3, pp. 17-35]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.4018/jdtis.2011070102]{.seriesInfo}, 2013,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.4018/jdtis.2011070102>\>.
:   

\[aura-dos\]
:   [Aura, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Nikander, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.
    Leiwo]{.refAuthor}, [\"DOS-Resistant Authentication with Client
    Puzzles\"]{.refTitle}, [8th International Workshop on Security
    Protocols, Security Protocols 2000, Lecture Notes in Computer
    Science, Vol. 2133, pp. 170-177, Springer]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1007/3-540-44810-1_22]{.seriesInfo}, September 2001,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-44810-1_22>\>.
:   

\[beal-dos\]
:   [Beal, J.]{.refAuthor} and [T. Shepard]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Deamplification of DoS Attacks via Puzzles\"]{.refTitle},
    October 2004.
:   

\[camarillo-p2psip\]
:   [Camarillo, G.]{.refAuthor}, [Mäenpää, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Keränen, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [V. Anderson]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Reducing delays related to NAT traversal in P2PSIP session
    establishments\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE Consumer Communications and
    Networking Conference (CCNC), pp. 549-553]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/CCNC.2011.5766540]{.seriesInfo}, 2011,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/CCNC.2011.5766540>\>.
:   

\[chiappa-endpoints\]
:   [Chiappa, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Endpoints and Endpoint Names: A
    Proposed Enhancement to the Internet Architecture\"]{.refTitle},
    1999, \<<http://mercury.lcs.mit.edu/~jnc/tech/endpoints.txt>\>.
:   

\[heer-end-host\]
:   [Heer, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Hummen, R.]{.refAuthor},
    [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Gotz, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [K.
    Wehrle]{.refAuthor}, [\"End-Host Authentication and Authorization
    for Middleboxes Based on a Cryptographic Namespace\"]{.refTitle},
    [2009 IEEE International Conference on Communications]{.refContent},
    [DOI 10.1109/ICC.2009.5198984]{.seriesInfo}, 2009,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC.2009.5198984>\>.
:   

\[heer-midauth\]
:   [Heer, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Hummen, R.]{.refAuthor},
    [Wehrle, K.]{.refAuthor}, and [M. Komu]{.refAuthor}, [\"End-Host
    Authentication for HIP Middleboxes\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-heer-hip-middle-auth-04]{.seriesInfo}, 31 October 2011,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-heer-hip-middle-auth-04>\>.
:   

\[henderson-vpls\]
:   [Henderson, T. R.]{.refAuthor}, [Venema, S. C.]{.refAuthor}, and [D.
    Mattes]{.refAuthor}, [\"HIP-based Virtual Private LAN Service
    (HIPLS)\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-henderson-hip-vpls-11]{.seriesInfo}, 3 August
    2016,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-henderson-hip-vpls-11>\>.
:   

\[hip-dex\]
:   [Moskowitz, R., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Hummen, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Komu]{.refAuthor}, [\"HIP Diet EXchange (DEX)\"]{.refTitle}, [Work
    in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-hip-dex-24]{.seriesInfo}, 19 January 2021,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-hip-dex-24>\>.
:   

\[hip-lte\]
:   [Liyanage, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Kumar, P.]{.refAuthor},
    [Ylianttila, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [A. Gurtov]{.refAuthor}, [\"Novel
    secure VPN architectures for LTE backhaul networks\"]{.refTitle},
    [Security and Communication Networks, Vol. 9, pp.
    1198-1215]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1002/sec.1411]{.seriesInfo},
    January 2016, \<<https://doi.org/10.1002/sec.1411>\>.
:   

\[hip-srtp\]
:   [Tschofenig, H.]{.refAuthor}, [Shanmugam, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [F.
    Muenz]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using SRTP transport format with
    HIP\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-tschofenig-hiprg-hip-srtp-02]{.seriesInfo}, 25 October 2006,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-tschofenig-hiprg-hip-srtp-02>\>.
:   

\[hummen\]
:   [Hummen, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Hiller, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Henze, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [K. Wehrle]{.refAuthor}, [\"Slimfit - A
    HIP DEX compression layer for the IP-based Internet of
    Things\"]{.refTitle}, [2013 IEEE 9th International Conference on
    Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications
    (WiMob), pp. 259-266]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/WiMOB.2013.6673370]{.seriesInfo}, October 2013,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/WiMOB.2013.6673370>\>.
:   

\[IEEE.802.15.4\]
:   [IEEE]{.refAuthor}, [\"IEEE Standard for Low-Rate Wireless
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE Standard 802.15.4]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.1109/IEEESTD.2020.9144691]{.seriesInfo}, July 2020,
    \<<https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9144691>\>.
:   

\[IEEE.802.15.9\]
:   [IEEE]{.refAuthor}, [\"IEEE Draft Recommended Practice for Transport
    of Key Management Protocol (KMP) Datagrams\"]{.refTitle}, [IEEE
    P802.15.9/D04]{.seriesInfo}, May 2015.
:   

\[karvonen-usable\]
:   [Karvonen, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [A.
    Gurtov]{.refAuthor}, [\"Usable security management with host
    identity protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [2009 IEEE/ACS International
    Conference on Computer Systems and Applications, pp.
    279-286]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/AICCSA.2009.5069337]{.seriesInfo}, 2009,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/AICCSA.2009.5069337>\>.
:   

\[komu-cloud\]
:   [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Sethi, M.]{.refAuthor},
    [Mallavarapu, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Oirola, H.]{.refAuthor},
    [Khan, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [S. Tarkoma]{.refAuthor}, [\"Secure
    Networking for Virtual Machines in the Cloud\"]{.refTitle}, [2012
    IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing Workshops, pp.
    88-96]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1109/ClusterW.2012.29]{.seriesInfo},
    2012, \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/ClusterW.2012.29>\>.
:   

\[komu-diss\]
:   [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Consolidated Namespace for Network
    Applications, Developers, Administrators and Users\"]{.refTitle},
    [Dissertation, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland]{.refContent}, [ISBN
    978-952-60-4904-5 (printed)]{.seriesInfo}, [ISBN 978-952-60-4905-2
    (electronic)]{.seriesInfo}, December 2012.
:   

\[komu-leap\]
:   [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor} and [J. Lindqvist]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Leap-of-Faith Security is Enough for IP Mobility\"]{.refTitle},
    [2009 6th IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference,
    Las Vegas, NV, USA, pp. 1-5]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/CCNC.2009.4784729]{.seriesInfo}, January 2009,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/CCNC.2009.4784729>\>.
:   

\[komu-mitigation\]
:   [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Tarkoma, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [A.
    Lukyanenko]{.refAuthor}, [\"Mitigation of Unsolicited Traffic Across
    Domains with Host Identities and Puzzles\"]{.refTitle}, [15th Nordic
    Conference on Secure IT Systems, NordSec 2010, Lecture Notes in
    Computer Science, Vol. 7127, pp. 33-48, Springer]{.refContent},
    [ISBN 978-3-642-27936-2]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.1007/978-3-642-27937-9_3]{.seriesInfo}, October 2010,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-27937-9_3>\>.
:   

\[kovacshazi-host\]
:   [Kovacshazi, Z.]{.refAuthor} and [R. Vida]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host
    Identity Specific Multicast\"]{.refTitle}, [International Conference
    on Networking and Services (ICNS \'07), Athens, Greece, pp.
    1-1]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1109/ICNS.2007.66]{.seriesInfo}, 2007,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNS.2007.66>\>.
:   

\[levae-barriers\]
:   [Levä, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [S.
    Luukkainen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Adoption barriers of network layer
    protocols: the case of host identity protocol\"]{.refTitle},
    [Computer Networks, Vol. 57, Issue 10, pp. 2218-2232]{.refContent},
    [ISSN 1389-1286]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.1016/j.comnet.2012.11.024]{.seriesInfo}, March 2013,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2012.11.024>\>.
:   

\[lindqvist-enterprise\]
:   [Lindqvist, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Vehmersalo, E.]{.refAuthor},
    [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [J. Manner]{.refAuthor}, [\"Enterprise
    Network Packet Filtering for Mobile Cryptographic
    Identities\"]{.refTitle}, [International Journal of Handheld
    Computing Research (IJHCR), Vol. 1, Issue 1, pp.
    79-94]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.4018/jhcr.2010090905]{.seriesInfo},
    2010, \<<https://doi.org/10.4018/jhcr.2010090905>\>.
:   

\[Nik2001\]
:   [Nikander, P.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Denial-of-Service, Address Ownership,
    and Early Authentication in the IPv6 World\"]{.refTitle}, [9th
    International Workshop on Security Protocols, Security Protocols
    2001, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2467, pp. 12-21,
    Springer]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1007/3-540-45807-7_3]{.seriesInfo},
    2002, \<<https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45807-7_3>\>.
:   

\[nsrg-report\]
:   [Lear, E.]{.refAuthor} and [R. Droms]{.refAuthor}, [\"What\'s In A
    Name: Thoughts from the NSRG\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-irtf-nsrg-report-10]{.seriesInfo}, 22 September 2003,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-nsrg-report-10>\>.
:   

\[paine-hip\]
:   [Paine, R. H.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Beyond HIP: The End to Hacking As We
    Know It\"]{.refTitle}, [BookSurge Publishing]{.refContent}, [ISBN-10
    1439256047]{.seriesInfo}, [ISBN-13
    978-1439256046]{.seriesInfo}, 2009.
:   

\[pham-leap\]
:   [Pham, V.]{.refAuthor} and [T. Aura]{.refAuthor}, [\"Security
    Analysis of Leap-of-Faith Protocols\"]{.refTitle}, [7th
    International ICST Conference, Security and Privacy for
    Communication Networks, SecureComm 2011, Lecture Notes of the
    Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and
    Telecommunications Engineering, Vol. 96]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1007/978-3-642-31909-9_19]{.seriesInfo}, 2012,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-31909-9_19>\>.
:   

\[ranjbar-synaptic\]
:   [Ranjbar, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor},
    [Salmela, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [T. Aura]{.refAuthor}, [\"SynAPTIC:
    Secure and Persistent Connectivity for Containers\"]{.refTitle},
    [2017 17th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and
    Grid Computing (CCGRID), Madrid, 2017, pp. 262-267]{.refContent},
    [DOI 10.1109/CCGRID.2017.62]{.seriesInfo}, 2017,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/CCGRID.2017.62>\>.
:   

\[RFC2136\]
:   [Vixie, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Thomson, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Rekhter, Y.]{.refAuthor}, and [J. Bound]{.refAuthor}, [\"Dynamic
    Updates in the Domain Name System (DNS UPDATE)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    2136]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2136]{.seriesInfo}, April 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2136>\>.
:   

\[RFC2766\]
:   [Tsirtsis, G.]{.refAuthor} and [P. Srisuresh]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Network Address Translation - Protocol Translation
    (NAT-PT)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2766]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2766]{.seriesInfo}, February 2000,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2766>\>.
:   

\[RFC3022\]
:   [Srisuresh, P.]{.refAuthor} and [K. Egevang]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Traditional IP Network Address Translator (Traditional
    NAT)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3022]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3022]{.seriesInfo}, January 2001,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3022>\>.
:   

\[RFC3102\]
:   [Borella, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Lo, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Grabelsky, D.]{.refAuthor}, and [G. Montenegro]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Realm Specific IP: Framework\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    3102]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC3102]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2001, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3102>\>.
:   

\[RFC3748\]
:   [Aboba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [Blunk, L.]{.refAuthor},
    [Vollbrecht, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Carlson, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [H.
    Levkowetz, Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Extensible Authentication Protocol
    (EAP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3748]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3748]{.seriesInfo}, June 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3748>\>.
:   

\[RFC3972\]
:   [Aura, T.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Cryptographically Generated Addresses
    (CGA)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3972]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3972]{.seriesInfo}, March 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3972>\>.
:   

\[RFC4033\]
:   [Arends, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Austein, R.]{.refAuthor},
    [Larson, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Massey, D.]{.refAuthor}, and [S.
    Rose]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS Security Introduction and
    Requirements\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4033]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4033]{.seriesInfo}, March 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4033>\>.
:   

\[RFC4225\]
:   [Nikander, P.]{.refAuthor}, [Arkko, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Aura, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Montenegro, G.]{.refAuthor}, and [E.
    Nordmark]{.refAuthor}, [\"Mobile IP Version 6 Route Optimization
    Security Design Background\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4225]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC4225]{.seriesInfo}, December 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4225>\>.
:   

\[RFC4380\]
:   [Huitema, C.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Teredo: Tunneling IPv6 over UDP
    through Network Address Translations (NATs)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4380]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4380]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2006, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4380>\>.
:   

\[RFC4423\]
:   [Moskowitz, R.]{.refAuthor} and [P. Nikander]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host
    Identity Protocol (HIP) Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4423]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4423]{.seriesInfo}, May 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4423>\>.
:   

\[RFC5218\]
:   [Thaler, D.]{.refAuthor} and [B. Aboba]{.refAuthor}, [\"What Makes
    for a Successful Protocol?\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5218]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC5218]{.seriesInfo}, July 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5218>\>.
:   

\[RFC5338\]
:   [Henderson, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Nikander, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Komu]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using the Host Identity Protocol with Legacy
    Applications\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5338]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5338]{.seriesInfo}, September 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5338>\>.
:   

\[RFC5887\]
:   [Carpenter, B.]{.refAuthor}, [Atkinson, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [H.
    Flinck]{.refAuthor}, [\"Renumbering Still Needs Work\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 5887]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5887]{.seriesInfo}, May
    2010, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5887>\>.
:   

\[RFC6078\]
:   [Camarillo, G.]{.refAuthor} and [J. Melen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host
    Identity Protocol (HIP) Immediate Carriage and Conveyance of
    Upper-Layer Protocol Signaling (HICCUPS)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6078]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6078]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2011, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6078>\>.
:   

\[RFC6250\]
:   [Thaler, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Evolution of the IP
    Model\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6250]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6250]{.seriesInfo}, May 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6250>\>.
:   

\[RFC6281\]
:   [Cheshire, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Zhu, Z.]{.refAuthor},
    [Wakikawa, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [L. Zhang]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Understanding Apple\'s Back to My Mac (BTMM)
    Service\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6281]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6281]{.seriesInfo}, June 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6281>\>.
:   

\[RFC6317\]
:   [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor} and [T. Henderson]{.refAuthor}, [\"Basic
    Socket Interface Extensions for the Host Identity Protocol
    (HIP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6317]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6317]{.seriesInfo}, July 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6317>\>.
:   

\[RFC6537\]
:   [Ahrenholz, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host Identity Protocol Distributed
    Hash Table Interface\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6537]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6537]{.seriesInfo}, February 2012,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6537>\>.
:   

\[RFC6538\]
:   [Henderson, T.]{.refAuthor} and [A. Gurtov]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Host
    Identity Protocol (HIP) Experiment Report\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6538]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6538]{.seriesInfo}, March 2012,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6538>\>.
:   

\[RFC7296\]
:   [Kaufman, C.]{.refAuthor}, [Hoffman, P.]{.refAuthor},
    [Nir, Y.]{.refAuthor}, [Eronen, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [T.
    Kivinen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2
    (IKEv2)\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 79]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    7296]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7296]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2014, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7296>\>.
:   

\[RFC7435\]
:   [Dukhovni, V.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Opportunistic Security: Some
    Protection Most of the Time\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7435]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC7435]{.seriesInfo}, December 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7435>\>.
:   

\[sarela-bloom\]
:   [Särelä, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Esteve Rothenberg, C.]{.refAuthor},
    [Zahemszky, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Nikander, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.
    Ott]{.refAuthor}, [\"BloomCasting: Security in Bloom Filter Based
    Multicast\"]{.refTitle}, [Information Security Technology for
    Applications, NordSec 2010, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol.
    7127, pages 1-16, Springer]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1007/978-3-642-27937-9_1]{.seriesInfo}, 2012,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-27937-9_1>\>.
:   

\[schuetz-intermittent\]
:   [Schütz, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Eggert, L.]{.refAuthor},
    [Schmid, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [M. Brunner]{.refAuthor}, [\"Protocol
    enhancements for intermittently connected hosts\"]{.refTitle}, [ACM
    SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, Vol. 35, Issue 3, pp.
    5-18]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1145/1070873.1070875]{.seriesInfo}, July
    2005, \<<https://doi.org/10.1145/1070873.1070875>\>.
:   

\[shields-hip\]
:   [Shields, C.]{.refAuthor} and [J. J.
    Garcia-Luna-Aceves]{.refAuthor}, [\"The HIP protocol for
    hierarchical multicast routing\"]{.refTitle}, [Proceedings of the
    seventeenth annual ACM symposium on Principles of distributed
    computing, pp. 257-266]{.refContent}, [ISBN
    0-89791-977-7]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.1145/277697.277744]{.seriesInfo}, 1998,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1145/277697.277744>\>.
:   

\[tempered-networks\]
:   [Tempered Networks]{.refAuthor}, [\"Identity-Defined Network (IDN)
    Architecture: Unified, Secure Networking Made Simple\"]{.refTitle},
    [White Paper]{.refContent}, 2016.
:   

\[tritilanunt-dos\]
:   [Tritilanunt, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Boyd, C.]{.refAuthor},
    [Foo, E.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.M.G. Nieto]{.refAuthor}, [\"Examining
    the DoS Resistance of HIP\"]{.refTitle}, [On the Move to Meaningful
    Internet Systems 2006: OTM 2006 Workshops, Lecture Notes in Computer
    Science, Vol. 4277, pp. 616-625, Springer]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1007/11915034_85]{.seriesInfo}, 2006,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1007/11915034_85>\>.
:   

\[urien-rfid\]
:   [Urien, P.]{.refAuthor}, [Chabanne, H.]{.refAuthor},
    [Pepin, C.]{.refAuthor}, [Orga, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Bouet, M.]{.refAuthor}, [de Cunha, D.O.]{.refAuthor},
    [Guyot, V.]{.refAuthor}, [Pujolle, G.]{.refAuthor},
    [Paradinas, P.]{.refAuthor}, [Gressier, E.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.-F.
    Susini]{.refAuthor}, [\"HIP-based RFID Networking
    Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [2007 IFIP International Conference on
    Wireless and Optical Communications Networks, pp. 1-5]{.refContent},
    [DOI 10.1109/WOCN.2007.4284140]{.seriesInfo}, 2007,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/WOCN.2007.4284140>\>.
:   

\[urien-rfid-draft\]
:   [Urien, P.]{.refAuthor}, [Lee, G. M.]{.refAuthor}, and [G.
    Pujolle]{.refAuthor}, [\"HIP support for RFIDs\"]{.refTitle}, [Work
    in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-irtf-hiprg-rfid-07]{.seriesInfo}, 23 April 2013,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-hiprg-rfid-07>\>.
:   

\[varjonen-split\]
:   [Varjonen, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Komu, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [A.
    Gurtov]{.refAuthor}, [\"Secure and Efficient IPv4/IPv6 Handovers
    Using Host-Based Identifier-Location Split\"]{.refTitle}, [Journal
    of Communications Software and Systems, Vol. 6, Issue
    1]{.refContent}, [ISSN 18456421]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.24138/jcomss.v6i1.193]{.seriesInfo}, 2010,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.24138/jcomss.v6i1.193>\>.
:   

\[xin-hip-lib\]
:   [Xin, G.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host Identity Protocol Version
    2.5\"]{.refTitle}, [Master\'s Thesis, Aalto University, Espoo,
    Finland]{.refContent}, June 2012.
:   

\[ylitalo-diss\]
:   [Ylitalo, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Secure Mobility at Multiple
    Granularity Levels over Heterogeneous Datacom
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [Dissertation, Helsinki University of
    Technology, Espoo, Finland]{.refContent}, [ISBN
    978-951-22-9531-9]{.seriesInfo}, 2008.
:   

\[ylitalo-spinat\]
:   [Ylitalo, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Salmela, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [H.
    Tschofenig]{.refAuthor}, [\"SPINAT: Integrating IPsec into Overlay
    Routing\"]{.refTitle}, [First International Conference on Security
    and Privacy for Emerging Areas in Communication Networks,
    SECURECOMM\'05, Athens, Greece, pp. 315-326]{.refContent}, [ISBN
    0-7695-2369-2]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.1109/SECURECOMM.2005.53]{.seriesInfo}, 2005,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/SECURECOMM.2005.53>\>.
:   

\[zhang-revocation\]
:   [Zhang, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Kuptsov, D.]{.refAuthor}, and [S.
    Shen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Host Identifier Revocation in
    HIP\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-irtf-hiprg-revocation-05]{.seriesInfo}, 9 March 2012,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-hiprg-revocation-05>\>.
:   

\[zhu-hip\]
:   [Zhu, X.]{.refAuthor}, [Ding, Z.]{.refAuthor}, and [X.
    Wang]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Multicast Routing Algorithm Applied to
    HIP-Multicast Model\"]{.refTitle}, [2011 International Conference on
    Network Computing and Information Security, Guilin, China, pp.
    169-174]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1109/NCIS.2011.42]{.seriesInfo},
    2011, \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/NCIS.2011.42>\>.
:   

\[zhu-secure\]
:   [Zhu, X.]{.refAuthor} and [J. W. Atwood]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Secure
    Multicast Model for Peer-to-Peer and Access Networks Using the Host
    Identity Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [2007 4th IEEE Consumer
    Communications and Networking Conference, Las Vegas, NV, USA, pages
    1098-1102]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1109/CCNC.2007.221]{.seriesInfo},
    2007, \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/CCNC.2007.221>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Appendix A.](#appendix-A){.section-number .selfRef} [Design Considerations](#name-design-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-design-considerations}

::: {#sec_benefits}
::: {#appendix-A.1 .section}
### [A.1.](#appendix-A.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Benefits of HIP](#name-benefits-of-hip){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-benefits-of-hip}

In the beginning, the network layer protocol (i.e., IP) had the
following four \"classic\" invariants:[¶](#appendix-A.1-1){.pilcrow}

1.  [Non-mutable: The address sent is the address
    received.[¶](#appendix-A.1-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-2.1}
2.  [Non-mobile: The address doesn\'t change during the course of an
    \"association\".[¶](#appendix-A.1-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-2.2}
3.  [Reversible: A return header can always be formed by reversing the
    source and destination
    addresses.[¶](#appendix-A.1-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-2.3}
4.  [Omniscient: Each host knows what address a partner host can use to
    send packets to
    it.[¶](#appendix-A.1-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-2.4}

Actually, the fourth can be inferred from 1 and 3, but it is worth
mentioning explicitly for reasons that will be obvious soon if not
already.[¶](#appendix-A.1-3){.pilcrow}

In the current \"post-classic\" world, we are intentionally trying to
get rid of the second invariant (both for mobility and for multihoming),
and we have been forced to give up the first and the fourth. [Realm
Specific IP](#RFC3102){.xref} \[[RFC3102](#RFC3102){.xref}\] is an
attempt to reinstate the fourth invariant without the first invariant.
IPv6 attempts to reinstate the first
invariant.[¶](#appendix-A.1-4){.pilcrow}

Few client-side systems on the Internet have DNS names that are
meaningful. That is, if they have a Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN),
that name typically belongs to a NAT device or a dial-up server, and
does not really identify the system itself but its current connectivity.
FQDNs (and their extensions as email names) are application-layer names;
more frequently naming services than particular systems. This is why
many systems on the Internet are not registered in the DNS; they do not
have services of interest to other Internet
hosts.[¶](#appendix-A.1-5){.pilcrow}

DNS names are references to IP addresses. This only demonstrates the
interrelationship of the networking and application layers. DNS, as the
Internet\'s only deployed and distributed database, is also the
repository of other namespaces, due in part to DNSSEC and
application-specific key records. Although each namespace can be
stretched (IP with v6, DNS with KEY records), neither can adequately
provide for host authentication or act as a separation between
internetworking and transport layers.[¶](#appendix-A.1-6){.pilcrow}

The Host Identity (HI) namespace fills an important gap between the IP
and DNS namespaces. An interesting thing about the HI is that it
actually allows a host to give up all but the 3rd network-layer
invariant. That is to say, as long as the source and destination
addresses in the network-layer protocol are reversible, HIP takes care
of host identification, and reversibility allows a local host to receive
a packet back from a remote host. The address changes occurring during
NAT transit (non-mutable) or host movement (non-omniscient or
non-mobile) can be managed by the HIP
layer.[¶](#appendix-A.1-7){.pilcrow}

With the exception of high-performance computing applications, the
sockets API is the most common way to develop network applications.
Applications use the sockets API either directly or indirectly through
some libraries or frameworks. However, the sockets API is based on the
assumption of static IP addresses, and DNS with its lifetime values was
invented at later stages during the evolution of the Internet. Hence,
the sockets API does not deal with the lifetime of addresses
\[[RFC6250](#RFC6250){.xref}\]. As the majority of the end-user
equipment is mobile today, their addresses are effectively ephemeral,
but the sockets API still gives a fallacious illusion of persistent IP
addresses to the unwary developer. HIP can be used to solidify this
illusion because HIP provides persistent, surrogate addresses to the
application layer in the form of LSIs and
HITs.[¶](#appendix-A.1-8){.pilcrow}

The persistent identifiers as provided by HIP are useful in multiple
scenarios (see, e.g., \[[ylitalo-diss](#ylitalo-diss){.xref}\] or
\[[komu-diss](#komu-diss){.xref}\] for a more elaborate
discussion):[¶](#appendix-A.1-9){.pilcrow}

-   [When a mobile host moves physically between two different WLAN
    networks and obtains a new address, an application using the
    identifiers remains isolated regardless of the topology changes
    while the underlying HIP layer reestablishes connectivity (i.e., a
    horizontal
    handoff).[¶](#appendix-A.1-10.1){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-10.1}
-   [Similarly, the application utilizing the identifiers remains again
    unaware of the topological changes when the underlying host equipped
    with WLAN and cellular network interfaces switches between the two
    different access technologies (i.e., a vertical
    handoff).[¶](#appendix-A.1-10.2){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-10.2}
-   [Even when hosts are located in private address realms, applications
    can uniquely distinguish different hosts from each other based on
    their identifiers. In other words, it can be stated that HIP
    improves Internet transparency for the application layer
    \[[komu-diss](#komu-diss){.xref}\].[¶](#appendix-A.1-10.3){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-10.3}
-   [Site renumbering events for services can occur due to corporate
    mergers or acquisitions, or by changes in Internet service provider.
    They can involve changing the entire network prefix of an
    organization, which is problematic due to hard-coded addresses in
    service configuration files or cached IP addresses at the client
    side \[[RFC5887](#RFC5887){.xref}\]. Considering such human errors,
    a site employing location-independent identifiers as promoted by HIP
    may experience fewer problems while renumbering their
    network.[¶](#appendix-A.1-10.4){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-10.4}
-   [More agile IPv6 interoperability can be achieved, as discussed in
    [Section 4.4](#lsi){.xref}. IPv6-based applications can communicate
    using HITs with IPv4-based applications that are using LSIs.
    Additionally, the underlying network type (IPv4 or IPv6) becomes
    independent of the addressing family of the
    application.[¶](#appendix-A.1-10.5){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-10.5}
-   [HITs (or LSIs) can be used in IP-based access control lists as a
    more secure replacement for IPv6 addresses. Besides security,
    HIT-based access control has two other benefits. First, the use of
    HITs can potentially halve the size of access control lists because
    separate rules for IPv4 are not needed
    \[[komu-diss](#komu-diss){.xref}\]. Second, HIT-based configuration
    rules in HIP-aware middleboxes remain static and independent of
    topology changes, thus simplifying administrative efforts
    particularly for mobile environments. For instance, the benefits of
    HIT-based access control have been harnessed in the case of
    HIP-aware firewalls, but can be utilized directly at the end-hosts
    as well
    \[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\].[¶](#appendix-A.1-10.6){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.1-10.6}

While some of these benefits could be and have been redundantly
implemented by individual applications, providing such generic
functionality at the lower layers is useful because it reduces software
development effort and networking software bugs (as the layer is tested
with multiple applications). It also allows the developer to focus on
building the application itself rather than delving into the intricacies
of mobile networking, thus facilitating separation of
concerns.[¶](#appendix-A.1-11){.pilcrow}

HIP could also be realized by combining a number of different protocols,
but the complexity of the resulting software may become substantially
larger, and the interaction between multiple, possibly layered protocols
may have adverse effects on latency and throughput. It is also worth
noting that virtually nothing prevents realizing the HIP architecture,
for instance, as an application-layer library, which has been actually
implemented in the past \[[xin-hip-lib](#xin-hip-lib){.xref}\]. However,
the trade-off in moving the HIP layer to the application layer is that
legacy applications may not be supported.[¶](#appendix-A.1-12){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-A.2 .section}
### [A.2.](#appendix-A.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Drawbacks of HIP](#name-drawbacks-of-hip){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-drawbacks-of-hip}

In computer science, many problems can be solved with an extra layer of
indirection. However, the indirection always involves some costs as
there is no such a thing as a \"free lunch\". In the case of HIP, the
main costs could be stated as follows:[¶](#appendix-A.2-1){.pilcrow}

-   [In general, an additional layer and a namespace always involve some
    initial effort in terms of implementation, deployment, and
    maintenance. Some education of developers and administrators may
    also be needed. However, the HIP community at the IETF has spent
    years in experimenting, exploring, testing, documenting, and
    implementing HIP to ease the adoption
    costs.[¶](#appendix-A.2-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.2-2.1}
-   [HIP introduces a need to manage HIs and requires a centralized
    approach to manage HIP-aware endpoints at scale. What were formerly
    IP address-based ACLs are now trusted HITs, and the HIT-to-IP
    address mappings as well as access policies must be managed.
    HIP-aware endpoints must also be able to operate autonomously to
    ensure mobility and availability (an endpoint must be able to run
    without having to have a persistent management connection). The
    users who want this better security and mobility of HIs instead of
    IP address-based ACLs have to then manage this additional \'identity
    layer\' in a nonpersistent fashion. As exemplified in [Appendix
    A.3.5](#tempered){.xref}, these challenges have been already solved
    in an infrastructure setting to distribute policy and manage the
    mappings and trust relationships between HIP-aware
    endpoints.[¶](#appendix-A.2-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.2-2.2}
-   [HIP decouples identifier and locator roles of IP addresses.
    Consequently, a mapping mechanism is needed to associate them
    together. A failure to map a HIT to its corresponding locator may
    result in failed connectivity because a HIT is \"flat\" by its
    nature and cannot be looked up from the hierarchically organized
    DNS. HITs are flat by design due to a security trade-off. The more
    bits that are allocated for the hash in the HIT, the less likely
    there will be (malicious)
    collisions.[¶](#appendix-A.2-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.2-2.3}
-   [From performance viewpoint, HIP control and data plane processing
    introduces some overhead in terms of throughput and latency as
    elaborated
    below.[¶](#appendix-A.2-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.2-2.4}

Related to deployment drawbacks, firewalls are commonly used to control
access to various services and devices in the current Internet. Since
HIP introduces an additional namespace, it is expected that the HIP
namespace would be filtered for unwanted connectivity also. While this
can be achieved with existing tools directly in the end-hosts, filtering
at the middleboxes requires modifications to existing firewall software
or additional middleboxes
\[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\].[¶](#appendix-A.2-3){.pilcrow}

The key exchange introduces some extra latency (two round trips) in the
initial transport-layer connection establishment between two hosts. With
TCP, additional delay occurs if the underlying network stack
implementation drops the triggering SYN packet during the key exchange.
The same cost may also occur during HIP handoff procedures. However,
subsequent TCP sessions using the same HIP association will not bear
this cost (within the key lifetime). Both the key exchange and handoff
penalties can be minimized by caching TCP packets. The latter case can
further be optimized with TCP user timeout extensions
\[[RFC5482](#RFC5482){.xref}\] as described in further detail by
[Schütz]{.contact-name} et al.
\[[schuetz-intermittent](#schuetz-intermittent){.xref}\].[¶](#appendix-A.2-4){.pilcrow}

The most CPU-intensive operations involve the use of the asymmetric keys
and Diffie-Hellman key derivation at the control plane, but this occurs
only during the key exchange, its maintenance (handoffs and refreshing
of key material), and teardown procedures of HIP associations. The data
plane is typically implemented with ESP because it has a smaller
overhead due to symmetric key encryption. Naturally, even ESP involves
some overhead in terms of latency (processing costs) and throughput
(tunneling) (see, e.g., \[[ylitalo-diss](#ylitalo-diss){.xref}\] for a
performance evaluation).[¶](#appendix-A.2-5){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#appendix-A.3 .section}
### [A.3.](#appendix-A.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Deployment and Adoption Considerations](#name-deployment-and-adoption-con){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-deployment-and-adoption-con}

This section describes some deployment and adoption considerations
related to HIP from a technical
perspective.[¶](#appendix-A.3-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#appendix-A.3.1 .section}
#### [A.3.1.](#appendix-A.3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Deployment Analysis](#name-deployment-analysis){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-deployment-analysis}

HIP has been adapted and deployed in an industrial control network in a
production factory, in which HIP\'s strong network-layer identity
supports the secure coexistence of the control network with many
untrusted network devices operated by third-party vendors
\[[paine-hip](#paine-hip){.xref}\]. Similarly, HIP has also been
included in a security product to support Layer 2 VPNs
\[[henderson-vpls](#I-D.henderson-hip-vpls){.xref}\] to enable security
zones in a supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) network.
However, HIP has not been a \"wild success\"
\[[RFC5218](#RFC5218){.xref}\] in the Internet as argued by
[Levä]{.contact-name} et al.
\[[levae-barriers](#levae-barriers){.xref}\]. Here, we briefly highlight
some of their findings based on interviews with 19 experts from the
industry and academia.[¶](#appendix-A.3.1-1){.pilcrow}

From a marketing perspective, the demand for HIP has been low and
substitute technologies have been favored. Another identified reason has
been that some technical misconceptions related to the early stages of
HIP specifications still persist. Two identified misconceptions are that
HIP does not support NAT traversal and that HIP must be implemented in
the OS kernel. Both of these claims are untrue; HIP does have NAT
traversal extensions \[[RFC9028](#RFC9028){.xref}\], and kernel
modifications can be avoided with modern operating systems by diverting
packets for userspace processing.[¶](#appendix-A.3.1-2){.pilcrow}

The analysis by [Levä]{.contact-name} et al. clarifies infrastructural
requirements for HIP. In a minimal setup, a client and server machine
have to run HIP software. However, to avoid manual configurations,
usually DNS records for HIP are set up. For instance, the popular DNS
server software Bind9 does not require any changes to accommodate DNS
records for HIP because they can be supported in binary format in its
configuration files \[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\]. HIP rendezvous
servers and firewalls are optional. No changes are required to network
address points, NATs, edge routers, or core networks. HIP may require
holes in legacy firewalls.[¶](#appendix-A.3.1-3){.pilcrow}

The analysis also clarifies the requirements for the host components
that consist of three parts. First, a HIP control plane component is
required, typically implemented as a userspace daemon. Second, a data
plane component is needed. Most HIP implementations utilize the
so-called Bound End-to-End Tunnel (BEET) mode of ESP that has been
available since Linux kernel 2.6.27, but the BEET mode is also included
as a userspace component in a few of the implementations. Third, HIP
systems usually provide a DNS proxy for the local host that translates
HIP DNS records to LSIs and HITs, and communicates the corresponding
locators to the HIP userspace daemon. While the third component is not
mandatory, it is very useful for avoiding manual configurations. The
three components are further described in the [HIP experiment
report](#RFC6538){.xref}
\[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\].[¶](#appendix-A.3.1-4){.pilcrow}

Based on the interviews, [Levä]{.contact-name} et al. suggest further
directions to facilitate HIP deployment. Transitioning a number of HIP
specifications to the Standards Track in the IETF has already taken
place, but the authors suggest other additional measures based on the
interviews. As a more radical measure, the authors suggest to implement
HIP as a purely application-layer library
\[[xin-hip-lib](#xin-hip-lib){.xref}\] or other kind of middleware. On
the other hand, more conservative measures include focusing on private
deployments controlled by a single stakeholder. As a more concrete
example of such a scenario, HIP could be used by a single service
provider to facilitate secure connectivity between its servers
\[[komu-cloud](#komu-cloud){.xref}\].[¶](#appendix-A.3.1-5){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#MACsec}
::: {#appendix-A.3.2 .section}
#### [A.3.2.](#appendix-A.3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [HIP in 802.15.4 Networks](#name-hip-in-802154-networks){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-hip-in-802154-networks}

The IEEE 802 standards have been defining MAC-layer security. Many of
these standards use Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)
\[[RFC3748](#RFC3748){.xref}\] as a Key Management System (KMS)
transport, but some like IEEE 802.15.4
\[[IEEE.802.15.4](#IEEE.802.15.4){.xref}\] leave the KMS and its
transport as \"out of scope\".[¶](#appendix-A.3.2-1){.pilcrow}

HIP is well suited as a KMS in these
environments:[¶](#appendix-A.3.2-2){.pilcrow}

-   [HIP is independent of IP addressing and can be directly transported
    over any network
    protocol.[¶](#appendix-A.3.2-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.2-3.1}
-   [Master keys in 802 protocols are commonly pair-based with group
    keys transported from the group controller using pairwise
    keys.[¶](#appendix-A.3.2-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.2-3.2}
-   [Ad hoc 802 networks can be better served by a peer-to-peer KMS than
    the EAP client/server
    model.[¶](#appendix-A.3.2-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.2-3.3}
-   [Some devices are very memory constrained, and a common KMS for both
    MAC and IP security represents a considerable code
    savings.[¶](#appendix-A.3.2-3.4){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.2-3.4}
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-A.3.3 .section}
#### [A.3.3.](#appendix-A.3.3){.section-number .selfRef} [HIP and Internet of Things](#name-hip-and-internet-of-things){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-hip-and-internet-of-things}

HIP requires certain amount computational resources from a device due to
cryptographic processing. HIP scales down to phones and small
system-on-chip devices (such as Raspberry Pis, Intel Edison), but small
sensors operating with small batteries have remained problematic.
Different extensions to the HIP have been developed to scale HIP down to
smaller devices, typically with different security trade-offs. For
example, the non-cryptographic identifiers have been proposed in RFID
scenarios. The Slimfit approach \[[hummen](#hummen){.xref}\] proposes a
compression layer for HIP to make it more suitable for constrained
networks. The approach is applied to a lightweight version of HIP (i.e.,
\"Diet HIP\") in order to scale down to small
sensors.[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-1){.pilcrow}

The HIP Diet EXchange (DEX) \[[hip-dex](#hip-dex){.xref}\] design aims
to reduce the overhead of the employed cryptographic primitives by
omitting public-key signatures and hash functions. In doing so, the main
goal is to still deliver security properties similar to the Base
Exchange (BEX).[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-2){.pilcrow}

DEX is primarily designed for computation- or memory-constrained
sensor/actuator devices. Like BEX, it is expected to be used together
with a suitable security protocol such as the ESP for the protection of
upper-layer protocol data. In addition, DEX can also be used as a keying
mechanism for security primitives at the MAC layer, e.g., for IEEE
802.15.9 networks
\[[IEEE.802.15.9](#IEEE.802.15.9){.xref}\].[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-3){.pilcrow}

The main differences between HIP BEX and DEX
are:[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-4){.pilcrow}

1.  ::: {#appendix-A.3.3-5.1}
    Minimum collection of cryptographic primitives to reduce the
    protocol overhead.[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-5.1.1){.pilcrow}

    -   [Static Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) key pairs for peer
        authentication and encryption of the session
        key.[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-5.1.2.1){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.3-5.1.2.1}
    -   [AES-CTR for symmetric encryption and AES-CMAC for MACing
        function.[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-5.1.2.2){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.3-5.1.2.2}
    -   [A simple fold function for HIT
        generation.[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-5.1.2.3){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.3-5.1.2.3}
    :::

2.  [Forfeit of perfect forward secrecy with the dropping of an
    ephemeral Diffie-Hellman key
    agreement.[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-5.2){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.3-5.2}

3.  [Forfeit of digital signatures with the removal of a hash function.
    Reliance on the ECDH-derived key used in HIP_MAC to prove ownership
    of the private
    key.[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-5.3){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.3-5.3}

4.  [Diffie-Hellman derived key ONLY used to protect the HIP packets. A
    separate secret exchange within the HIP packets creates the session
    key(s).[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-5.4){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.3-5.4}

5.  [Optional retransmission strategy tailored to handle the potentially
    extensive processing time of the employed cryptographic operations
    on computationally constrained
    devices.[¶](#appendix-A.3.3-5.5){.pilcrow}]{#appendix-A.3.3-5.5}
:::

::: {#appendix-A.3.4 .section}
#### [A.3.4.](#appendix-A.3.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Infrastructure Applications](#name-infrastructure-applications){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-infrastructure-applications}

The [HIP experimentation report](#RFC6538){.xref}
\[[RFC6538](#RFC6538){.xref}\] enumerates a number of client and server
applications that have been trialed with HIP. Based on the report, this
section highlights and complements some potential ways how HIP could be
exploited in existing infrastructure such as routers, gateways, and
proxies.[¶](#appendix-A.3.4-1){.pilcrow}

HIP has been successfully used with forward web proxies (i.e.,
client-side proxies). HIP was used between a client host (web browser)
and a forward proxy (Apache server) that terminated the HIP/ESP tunnel.
The forward web proxy translated HIP-based traffic originating from the
client into non-HIP traffic towards any web server in the Internet.
Consequently, the HIP-capable client could communicate with
HIP-incapable web servers. This way, the client could utilize mobility
support as provided by HIP while using the fixed IP address of the web
proxy, for instance, to access services that were allowed only from the
IP address range of the proxy.[¶](#appendix-A.3.4-2){.pilcrow}

HIP with reverse web proxies (i.e., server-side proxies) has also been
investigated, as described in more detail in
\[[komu-cloud](#komu-cloud){.xref}\]. In this scenario, a HIP-incapable
client accessed a HIP-capable web service via an intermediary load
balancer (a web-based load balancer implementation called HAProxy). The
load balancer translated non-HIP traffic originating from the client
into HIP-based traffic for the web service (consisting of front-end and
back-end servers). Both the load balancer and the web service were
located in a data center. One of the key benefits for encrypting the web
traffic with HIP in this scenario was supporting a private-public cloud
scenario (i.e., hybrid cloud) where the load balancer, front-end
servers, and back-end servers were located in different data centers,
and thus the traffic needed to be protected when it passed through
potentially insecure networks between the borders of the private and
public clouds.[¶](#appendix-A.3.4-3){.pilcrow}

While HIP could be used to secure access to intermediary devices (e.g.,
access to switches with legacy telnet), it has also been used to secure
intermittent connectivity between middlebox infrastructure. For
instance, earlier research
\[[komu-mitigation](#komu-mitigation){.xref}\] utilized HIP between
Simple Mail Transport Protocol (SMTP) servers in order to exploit the
computational puzzles of HIP as a spam mitigation mechanism. A rather
obvious practical challenge in this approach was the lack of HIP
adoption on existing SMTP servers.[¶](#appendix-A.3.4-4){.pilcrow}

To avoid deployment hurdles with existing infrastructure, HIP could be
applied in the context of new protocols with little deployment. Namely,
HIP has been studied in the context of a new protocol, peer-to-peer SIP
\[[camarillo-p2psip](#camarillo-p2psip){.xref}\]. The work has resulted
in a number of related RFCs \[[RFC6078](#RFC6078){.xref}\],
\[[RFC6079](#RFC6079){.xref}\], and \[[RFC7086](#RFC7086){.xref}\]. The
key idea in the research work was to avoid redundant, time-consuming ICE
procedures by grouping different connections (i.e., SIP and media
streams) together using the low-layer HIP, which executes NAT traversal
procedures only once per host. An interesting aspect in the approach was
the use of P2P-SIP infrastructure as rendezvous servers for the HIP
control plane instead of utilizing the traditional HIP rendezvous
services \[[RFC8004](#RFC8004){.xref}\].[¶](#appendix-A.3.4-5){.pilcrow}

Researchers have proposed using HIP in cellular networks as a mobility,
multihoming, and security solution. \[[hip-lte](#hip-lte){.xref}\]
provides a security analysis and simulation measurements of using HIP in
Long Term Evolution (LTE) backhaul
networks.[¶](#appendix-A.3.4-6){.pilcrow}

HIP has been studied for securing cloud internal connectivity. First
with virtual machines \[[komu-cloud](#komu-cloud){.xref}\] and then
between Linux containers
\[[ranjbar-synaptic](#ranjbar-synaptic){.xref}\]. In both cases, HIP was
suggested as a solution to NAT traversal that could be utilized both
internally by a cloud network and between multi-cloud deployments.
Specifically in the former case, HIP was beneficial sustaining
connectivity with a virtual machine while it migrated to a new location.
In the latter case, a Software-Defined Networking (SDN) controller acted
as a rendezvous server for HIP-capable containers. The controller
enforced strong replay protection by adding middlebox nonces
\[[heer-end-host](#heer-end-host){.xref}\] to the passing HIP base
exchange and UPDATE messages.[¶](#appendix-A.3.4-7){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#tempered}
::: {#appendix-A.3.5 .section}
#### [A.3.5.](#appendix-A.3.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Management of Identities in a Commercial Product](#name-management-of-identities-in){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-management-of-identities-in}

Tempered Networks provides HIP-based products. They refer to their
platform as [Identity-Defined Networking
(IDN)](#tempered-networks){.xref}
\[[tempered-networks](#tempered-networks){.xref}\] because of HIP\'s
identity-first networking architecture. Their objective has been to make
it simple and nondisruptive to deploy HIP-enabled services widely in
production environments with the purpose of enabling transparent device
authentication and authorization, cloaking, segmentation, and end-to-end
networking. The goal is to eliminate much of the circular dependencies,
exploits, and layered complexity of traditional \"address-defined
networking\" that prevents mobility and verifiable device access
control. The products in the portfolio of Tempered Networks utilize HIP
are as follows:[¶](#appendix-A.3.5-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

HIP Switches / Gateways
:   These are physical or virtual appliances that serve as the HIP
    gateway and policy enforcement point for non-HIP-aware applications
    and devices located behind it. No IP or infrastructure changes are
    required in order to connect, cloak, and protect the non-HIP-aware
    devices. Currently known supported platforms for HIP gateways are
    x86 and ARM chipsets, ESXi, Hyper-V, KVM, AWS, Azure, and Google
    clouds.[¶](#appendix-A.3.5-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

HIP Relays / Rendezvous
:   These are physical or virtual appliances that serve as
    identity-based routers authorizing and bridging HIP endpoints
    without decrypting the HIP session. A HIP relay can be deployed as a
    standalone appliance or in a cluster for horizontal scaling. All
    HIP-aware endpoints and the devices they\'re connecting and
    protecting can remain privately addressed. The appliances eliminate
    IP conflicts, tunnel through NAT and carrier-grade NAT, and require
    no changes to the underlying infrastructure. The only requirement is
    that a HIP endpoint should have outbound access to the Internet and
    that a HIP Relay should have a public
    address.[¶](#appendix-A.3.5-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

HIP-Aware Clients and Servers
:   This is software that is installed in the host\'s network stack and
    enforces policy for that host. HIP clients support split tunneling.
    Both the HIP client and HIP server can interface with the local host
    firewall, and the HIP server can be locked down to listen only on
    the port used for HIP, making the server invisible from unauthorized
    devices. Currently known supported platforms are Windows, OS X, iOS,
    Android, Ubuntu, CentOS, and other Linux
    derivatives.[¶](#appendix-A.3.5-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Policy Orchestration Managers
:   These physical or virtual appliances serve as the engine to define
    and distribute network and security policy (HI and IP mappings,
    overlay networks, and whitelist policies, etc.) to HIP-aware
    endpoints. Orchestration does not need to persist to the HIP
    endpoints and vice versa, allowing for autonomous host networking
    and security.[¶](#appendix-A.3.5-2.8){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-A.4 .section}
### [A.4.](#appendix-A.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Answers to NSRG Questions](#name-answers-to-nsrg-questions){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-answers-to-nsrg-questions}

The IRTF Name Space Research Group has posed a number of evaluating
questions in [their report](#I-D.irtf-nsrg-report){.xref}
\[[nsrg-report](#I-D.irtf-nsrg-report){.xref}\]. In this section, we
provide answers to these questions.[¶](#appendix-A.4-1){.pilcrow}

1.  ::: {#appendix-A.4-2.1}
    How would a stack name improve the overall functionality of the
    Internet?[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.1.1){.pilcrow}

    HIP decouples the internetworking layer from the transport layer,
    allowing each to evolve separately. The decoupling makes end-host
    mobility and multihoming easier, also across IPv4 and IPv6 networks.
    HIs make network renumbering easier, and they also make process
    migration and clustered servers easier to implement. Furthermore,
    being cryptographic in nature, they provide the basis for solving
    the security problems related to end-host mobility and
    multihoming.[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.1.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

2.  ::: {#appendix-A.4-2.2}
    What does a stack name look like?[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.2.1){.pilcrow}

    A HI is a cryptographic public key. However, instead of using the
    keys directly, most protocols use a fixed-size hash of the public
    key.[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

3.  ::: {#appendix-A.4-2.3}
    What is its lifetime?[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.3.1){.pilcrow}

    HIP provides both stable and temporary Host Identifiers. Stable HIs
    are typically long-lived, with a lifetime of years or more. The
    lifetime of temporary HIs depends on how long the upper-layer
    connections and applications need them, and can range from a few
    seconds to years.[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.3.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

4.  ::: {#appendix-A.4-2.4}
    Where does it live in the stack?[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.4.1){.pilcrow}

    The HIs live between the transport and internetworking
    layers.[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.4.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

5.  ::: {#appendix-A.4-2.5}
    How is it used on the endpoints?[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.5.1){.pilcrow}

    The Host Identifiers may be used directly or indirectly (in the form
    of HITs or LSIs) by applications when they access network services.
    Additionally, the Host Identifiers, as public keys, are used in the
    built-in key agreement protocol, called the HIP base exchange, to
    authenticate the hosts to each
    other.[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.5.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

6.  ::: {#appendix-A.4-2.6}
    What administrative infrastructure is needed to support
    it?[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.6.1){.pilcrow}

    In some environments, it is possible to use HIP opportunistically,
    without any infrastructure. However, to gain full benefit from HIP,
    the HIs must be stored in the DNS or a PKI, and the rendezvous
    mechanism is needed
    \[[RFC8005](#RFC8005){.xref}\].[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.6.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

7.  ::: {#appendix-A.4-2.7}
    If we add an additional layer, would it make the address list in
    SCTP unnecessary?[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.7.1){.pilcrow}

    Yes[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.7.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

8.  ::: {#appendix-A.4-2.8}
    What additional security benefits would a new naming scheme
    offer?[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.8.1){.pilcrow}

    HIP reduces dependency on IP addresses, making the so-called address
    ownership \[[Nik2001](#Nik2001){.xref}\] problems easier to solve.
    In practice, HIP provides security for end-host mobility and
    multihoming. Furthermore, since HIP Host Identifiers are public
    keys, standard public key certificate infrastructures can be applied
    on the top of HIP.[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.8.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

9.  ::: {#appendix-A.4-2.9}
    What would the resolution mechanisms be, or what characteristics of
    a resolution mechanisms would be
    required?[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.9.1){.pilcrow}

    For most purposes, an approach where DNS names are resolved
    simultaneously to HIs and IP addresses is sufficient. However, if it
    becomes necessary to resolve HIs into IP addresses or back to DNS
    names, a flat resolution infrastructure is needed. Such an
    infrastructure could be based on the ideas of Distributed Hash
    Tables, but would require significant new development and
    deployment.[¶](#appendix-A.4-2.9.2){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

For the people historically involved in the early stages of HIP, see the
Acknowledgments section in the Host Identity Protocol
specification.[¶](#appendix-B-1){.pilcrow}

During the later stages of this document, when the editing baton was
transferred to [Pekka Nikander]{.contact-name}, the comments from the
early implementers and others, including [Jari Arkko]{.contact-name},
[Jeff Ahrenholz]{.contact-name}, [Tom Henderson]{.contact-name}, [Petri
Jokela]{.contact-name}, [Miika Komu]{.contact-name}, [Mika
Kousa]{.contact-name}, [Andrew McGregor]{.contact-name}, [Jan
Melen]{.contact-name}, [Tim Shepard]{.contact-name}, [Jukka
Ylitalo]{.contact-name}, [Sasu Tarkoma]{.contact-name}, and [Jorma
Wall]{.contact-name}, were invaluable. Also, the comments from [Lars
Eggert]{.contact-name}, [Spencer Dawkins]{.contact-name}, [Dave
Crocker]{.contact-name}, and [Erik Giesa]{.contact-name} were also
useful.[¶](#appendix-B-2){.pilcrow}

The authors want to express their special thanks to [Tom
Henderson]{.contact-name}, who took the burden of editing the document
in response to IESG comments at the time when both of the authors were
busy doing other things. Without his perseverance, the original document
might have never made it as RFC 4423.[¶](#appendix-B-3){.pilcrow}

This main effort to update and move HIP forward within the IETF process
owes its impetus to a number of HIP development teams. The authors are
grateful for Boeing, Helsinki Institute for Information Technology
(HIIT), NomadicLab of Ericsson, and the three universities: RWTH Aachen,
Aalto, and University of Helsinki for their efforts. Without their
collective efforts, HIP would have withered as on the IETF vine as a
nice concept.[¶](#appendix-B-4){.pilcrow}

Thanks also to [Suvi Koskinen]{.contact-name} for her help with
proofreading and with the reference jungle.[¶](#appendix-B-5){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-C .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Robert Moskowitz ([editor]{.role})]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[HTT Consulting]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Oak Park]{.locality}, [Michigan]{.region}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <rgm@labs.htt-consult.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Miika Komu]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Hirsalantie 11]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
FI-[02420]{.postal-code} [Jorvas]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Finland]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <miika.komu@ericsson.com>
:::
:::
:::
