  RFC 9064   Thoughts on ICN QoS Architecture   June 2021
  ---------- ---------------------------------- -----------
  Oran       Informational                      \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)

RFC:
:   [9064](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9064){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   June 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Author:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    D. Oran
    :::

    ::: org
    Network Systems Research and Design
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9064 {#rfcnum}

# Considerations in the Development of a QoS Architecture for CCNx-Like Information-Centric Networking Protocols {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This is a position paper. It documents the author\'s personal views on
how Quality of Service (QoS) capabilities ought to be accommodated in
Information-Centric Networking (ICN) protocols like Content-Centric
Networking (CCNx) or Named Data Networking (NDN), which employ
flow-balanced Interest/Data exchanges and hop-by-hop forwarding state as
their fundamental machinery. It argues that such protocols demand a
substantially different approach to QoS from that taken in TCP/IP and
proposes specific design patterns to achieve both classification and
differentiated QoS treatment on both a flow and aggregate basis. It also
considers the effect of caches in addition to memory, CPU, and link
bandwidth as resources that should be subject to explicitly unfair
resource allocation. The proposed methods are intended to operate purely
at the network layer, providing the primitives needed to achieve
transport- and higher-layer QoS objectives. It explicitly excludes any
discussion of Quality of Experience (QoE), which can only be assessed
and controlled at the application layer or
above.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}

This document is not a product of the IRTF Information-Centric
Networking Research Group (ICNRG) but has been through formal Last Call
and has the support of the participants in the research group for
publication as an individual
submission.[¶](#section-abstract-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
The IRTF publishes the results of Internet-related research and
development activities. These results might not be suitable for
deployment. This RFC represents the individual opinion(s) of one or more
members of the Information-Centric Networking Research Group of the
Internet Research Task Force (IRTF). Documents approved for publication
by the IRSG are not candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see
Section 2 of RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9064>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1}
        [1.1](#section-1.1){.xref}.  [Applicability Assessment by ICNRG
        Chairs](#name-applicability-assessment-by){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Requirements
    Language](#name-requirements-language){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Background on Quality of Service in
    Network Protocols](#name-background-on-quality-of-se){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [Basics on How ICN Protocols like
        NDN and CCNx Work](#name-basics-on-how-icn-protocols){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [Congestion Control Basics Relevant
        to ICN](#name-congestion-control-basics-r){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [What Can We Control to Achieve QoS in
    ICN?](#name-what-can-we-control-to-achi){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [How Does This Relate to QoS in
    TCP/IP?](#name-how-does-this-relate-to-qos){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Why Is ICN Different? Can We Do
    Better?](#name-why-is-icn-different-can-we){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1}
        [6.1](#section-6.1){.xref}.  [Equivalence Class
        Capabilities](#name-equivalence-class-capabilit){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2}
        [6.2](#section-6.2){.xref}.  [Topology Interactions with
        QoS](#name-topology-interactions-with-){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.3}
        [6.3](#section-6.3){.xref}.  [Specification of QoS
        Treatments](#name-specification-of-qos-treatm){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.4}
        [6.4](#section-6.4){.xref}.  [ICN Forwarding Semantics Effect on
        QoS](#name-icn-forwarding-semantics-ef){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.5}
        [6.5](#section-6.5){.xref}.  [QoS Interactions with
        Caching](#name-qos-interactions-with-cachi){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Strawman Principles for an ICN QoS
    Architecture](#name-strawman-principles-for-an-){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.xref}.  [Can Intserv-Like Traffic Control
        in ICN Provide Richer QoS
        Semantics?](#name-can-intserv-like-traffic-co){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.1}
        [10.1](#section-10.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.2}
        [10.2](#section-10.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Author\'s
    Address](#name-authors-address){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#intro}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

The TCP/IP protocol suite used on today\'s Internet has over 30 years of
accumulated research and engineering into the provisioning of QoS
machinery, employed with varying success in different environments. ICN
protocols like NDN \[[NDN](#NDN){.xref}\] and CCNx
\[[RFC8569](#RFC8569){.xref}\] \[[RFC8609](#RFC8609){.xref}\] have an
accumulated ten years of research and very little deployment. We
therefore have the opportunity to either recapitulate the approaches
taken with TCP/IP (e.g., Intserv \[[RFC2998](#RFC2998){.xref}\] and
Diffserv \[[RFC2474](#RFC2474){.xref}\]) or design a new architecture
and associated mechanisms aligned with the properties of ICN protocols,
which differ substantially from those of TCP/IP. This position paper
advocates the latter approach and comprises the author\'s personal views
on how QoS capabilities ought to be accommodated in ICN protocols like
CCNx or NDN. Specifically, these protocols differ in fundamental ways
from TCP/IP. The important differences are summarized in [Table
1](#IPvsICN){.xref}:[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-differences-between-ip-and-}

::: {#IPvsICN}
  TCP/IP                                CCNx or NDN
  ------------------------------------- ------------------------------------
  Stateless forwarding                  Stateful forwarding
  Simple packets                        Object model with optional caching
  Pure datagram model                   Request-response model
  Asymmetric routing                    Symmetric routing
  Independent flow directions           Flow balance (see note below)
  Flows grouped by IP prefix and port   Flows grouped by name prefix
  End-to-end congestion control         Hop-by-hop congestion control

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [Differences between IP and ICN
  Relevant to QoS
  Architecture](#name-differences-between-ip-and-){.selfRef}
:::

Note: Flow balance is a property of NDN and CCNx that ensures one
Interest packet provokes a response of no more than one Data packet.
Further discussion of the relevance of this to QoS can be found in
\[[FLOWBALANCE](#I-D.oran-icnrg-flowbalance){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-3.1){.pilcrow}

This document proposes specific design patterns to achieve both flow
classification and differentiated QoS treatment for ICN on both a flow
and aggregate basis. It also considers the effect of caches in addition
to memory, CPU, and link bandwidth as resources that should be subject
to explicitly unfair resource allocation. The proposed methods are
intended to operate purely at the network layer, providing the
primitives needed to achieve both transport and higher-layer QoS
objectives. It does not propose detailed protocol machinery to achieve
these goals; it leaves these to supplementary specifications, such as
\[[FLOWCLASS](#I-D.moiseenko-icnrg-flowclass){.xref}\] and
\[[DNC-QOS-ICN](#I-D.anilj-icnrg-dnc-qos-icn){.xref}\]. It explicitly
excludes any discussion of QoE, which can only be assessed and
controlled at the application layer or above.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

Much of this document is derived from presentations the author has given
at ICNRG meetings over the last few years that are available through the
IETF datatracker (see, for example,
\[[Oran2018QoSslides](#Oran2018QoSslides){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-1.1 .section}
### [1.1.](#section-1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Applicability Assessment by ICNRG Chairs](#name-applicability-assessment-by){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-applicability-assessment-by}

QoS in ICN is an important topic with a huge design space. ICNRG has
been discussing different specific protocol mechanisms as well as
conceptual approaches. This document presents architectural
considerations for QoS, leveraging ICN properties instead of merely
applying IP-QoS mechanisms, without defining a specific architecture or
specific protocol mechanisms yet. However, there is consensus in ICNRG
that this document, clarifying the author\'s views, could inspire such
work and should hence be published as a position
paper.[¶](#section-1.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Requirements Language](#name-requirements-language){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-requirements-language}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#background}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Background on Quality of Service in Network Protocols](#name-background-on-quality-of-se){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-background-on-quality-of-se}

Much of this background material is tutorial and can be simply skipped
by readers familiar with the long and checkered history of quality of
service in packet networks. Other parts of it are polemical yet serve to
illuminate the author\'s personal biases and technical
views.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

All networking systems provide some degree of \"quality of service\" in
that they exhibit nonzero utility when offered traffic to carry. In
other words, the network is totally useless if it never delivers any of
the traffic injected by applications. The term QoS is therefore more
correctly applied in a more restricted sense to describe systems that
control the allocation of various resources in order to achieve *managed
unfairness*. Absent explicit mechanisms to decide which traffic to treat
unfairly, most systems try to achieve some form of \"fairness\" in the
allocation of resources, optimizing the overall utility delivered to all
traffic under the constraint of available resources. From this, it
should be obvious that you cannot use QoS mechanisms to create or
otherwise increase resource capacity! In fact, all known QoS schemes
have nonzero overhead and hence may (albeit slightly) decrease the total
resources available to carry user traffic.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

Further, accumulated experience seems to indicate that QoS is helpful in
a fairly narrow range of network conditions:[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

-   [If your resources are lightly loaded, you don\'t need it, as
    neither congestive loss nor substantial queuing delay
    occurs.[¶](#section-3-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-4.1}

-   [If your resources are heavily oversubscribed, it doesn\'t save you.
    So many users will be unhappy that you are probably not delivering a
    viable service.[¶](#section-3-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-4.2}

-   ::: {#section-3-4.3}
    Failures can rapidly shift your state from the first above to the
    second, in which case either:[¶](#section-3-4.3.1){.pilcrow}

    -   [Your QoS machinery cannot respond quickly enough to maintain
        the advertised service quality continuously,
        or[¶](#section-3-4.3.2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-4.3.2.1}
    -   [Resource allocations are sufficiently conservative to result in
        substantial wasted capacity under non-failure
        conditions.[¶](#section-3-4.3.2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-4.3.2.2}
    :::

Nevertheless, though not universally deployed, QoS is advantageous at
least for some applications and some network environments. Some examples
include:[¶](#section-3-5){.pilcrow}

-   [Applications with steep utility functions
    \[[Shenker2006](#Shenker2006){.xref}\], such as real-time
    multimedia[¶](#section-3-6.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-6.1}
-   [Applications with safety-critical operational constraints, such as
    avionics or industrial
    automation[¶](#section-3-6.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-6.2}
-   [Dedicated or tightly managed networks whose economics depend on
    strict adherence to challenging service level agreements
    (SLAs)[¶](#section-3-6.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-6.3}

Another factor in the design and deployment of QoS is the scalability
and scope over which the desired service can be achieved. Here there are
two major considerations, one technical, the other
economic/political:[¶](#section-3-7){.pilcrow}

-   [Some signaled QoS schemes, such as the Resource reSerVation
    Protocol (RSVP) \[[RFC2205](#RFC2205){.xref}\], maintain state in
    routers for each flow, which scales linearly with the number of
    flows. For core routers through which pass millions to billions of
    flows, the memory required is infeasible to
    provide.[¶](#section-3-8.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-8.1}
-   [The Internet is comprised of many minimally cooperating autonomous
    systems \[[AS](#AS){.xref}\]. There are practically no successful
    examples of QoS deployments crossing the AS boundaries of multiple
    service providers. In almost all cases, this limits the
    applicability of QoS capabilities to be
    intra-domain.[¶](#section-3-8.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-8.2}

This document adopts a narrow definition of QoS as *managed unfairness*
(see note below). However, much of the networking literature uses the
term more colloquially, applying it to any mechanism that improves
overall performance. One could use a different, broader definition of
QoS that encompasses optimizing the allocation of network resources
across all offered traffic without considering individual users\'
traffic. A consequence would be the need to cover whether (and how) ICN
might result in better overall performance than IP under constant
resource conditions, which is a much broader goal than that attempted
here. The chosen narrower scope comports with the commonly understood
meaning of \"QoS\" in the research community. Under this scope, and
under constant resource constraints, the only way to provide traffic
discrimination is in fact to sacrifice fairness. Readers assuming the
broader context will find a large class of proven techniques to be
ignored. This is intentional. Among these are seamless producer mobility
schemes like [MAP-Me](#Auge2018){.xref} \[[Auge2018](#Auge2018){.xref}\]
and network coding of ICN data as discussed in
\[[NWC-CCN-REQS](#I-D.irtf-nwcrg-nwc-ccn-reqs){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-9){.pilcrow}

Note: The term *managed unfairness* used to explain QoS is generally
ascribed to Van Jacobson, who in talks in the late 1990s said, \"\[The
problem we are solving is to\] Give \'better\' service to some at the
expense of giving worse service to others. QoS fantasies to the
contrary, it\'s a zero-sum game. In other words, QoS is *managed
unfairness*.\"[¶](#section-3-10.1){.pilcrow}

Finally, the relationship between QoS and either accounting or billing
is murky. Some schemes can accurately account for resource consumption
and ascertain to which user to allocate the usage. Others cannot. While
the choice of mechanism may have important practical economic and
political consequences for cost and workable business models, this
document considers none of those things and discusses QoS only in the
context of providing managed unfairness.[¶](#section-3-11){.pilcrow}

For those unfamiliar with ICN protocols, a brief description of how NDN
and CCNx operate as a packet network is in [Section
3.1](#ICNbasics){.xref}. Some further background on congestion control
for ICN follows in [Section
3.2](#CCbasics){.xref}.[¶](#section-3-12){.pilcrow}

::: {#ICNbasics}
::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Basics on How ICN Protocols like NDN and CCNx Work](#name-basics-on-how-icn-protocols){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-basics-on-how-icn-protocols}

The following summarizes the salient features of the NDN and CCNx ICN
protocols relevant to congestion control and QoS. Quite extensive
tutorial information may be found in a number of places, including
material available from
\[[NDNTutorials](#NDNTutorials){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

In NDN and CCNx, all protocol interactions operate as a two-way
handshake. Named content is requested by a *consumer* via an *Interest
message* that is routed hop-by-hop through a series of *forwarders*
until it reaches a node that stores the requested data. This can be
either the *producer* of the data or a forwarder holding a cached copy
of the requested data. The content matching the name in the Interest
message is returned to the requester over the *inverse* of the path
traversed by the corresponding Interest.[¶](#section-3.1-2){.pilcrow}

Forwarding in CCNx and NDN is *per-packet stateful*. Routing information
to select next hop(s) for an Interest is obtained from a *Forwarding
Information Base (FIB)*, which is similar in function to the FIB in an
IP router except that it holds name prefixes rather than IP address
prefixes. Conventionally, a *Longest Name Prefix Match (LNPM)* is used
for lookup, although other algorithms are possible, including controlled
flooding and adaptive learning based on prior
history.[¶](#section-3.1-3){.pilcrow}

Each Interest message leaves a trail of \"breadcrumbs\" as state in each
forwarder. This state, held in a data structure known as a *Pending
Interest Table (PIT)*, is used to forward the returning Data message to
the consumer. Since the PIT constitutes per-packet state, it is
therefore a large consumer of memory resources, especially in forwarders
carrying high traffic loads over long Round-Trip Time (RTT) paths, and
hence plays a substantial role as a QoS-controllable resource in ICN
forwarders.[¶](#section-3.1-4){.pilcrow}

In addition to its role in forwarding Interest messages and returning
the corresponding Data messages, an ICN forwarder can also operate as a
cache, optionally storing a copy of any Data messages it has seen in a
local data structure known as a *Content Store (CS)*. Data in the CS may
be returned in response to a matching Interest rather than forwarding
the Interest further through the network to the original Producer. Both
CCNx and NDN have a variety of ways to configure caching, including
mechanisms to avoid both cache pollution and cache poisoning (these are
clearly beyond the scope of this brief
introduction).[¶](#section-3.1-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#CCbasics}
::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Congestion Control Basics Relevant to ICN](#name-congestion-control-basics-r){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-congestion-control-basics-r}

In any packet network that multiplexes traffic among multiple sources
and destinations, congestion control is necessary in order
to:[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

1.  [Prevent collapse of utility due to overload, where the total
    offered service declines as load increases, perhaps precipitously,
    rather than increasing or remaining
    flat.[¶](#section-3.2-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.1}
2.  [Avoid starvation of some traffic due to excessive demand by other
    traffic.[¶](#section-3.2-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.2}
3.  [Beyond the basic protections against starvation, achieve
    \"fairness\" among competing traffic. Two common objective functions
    are max-min fairness \[[minmaxfairness](#minmaxfairness){.xref}\]
    and proportional fairness
    \[[proportionalfairness](#proportionalfairness){.xref}\], both of
    which have been implemented and deployed successfully on packet
    networks for many
    years.[¶](#section-3.2-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.3}

Before moving on to QoS, it is useful to consider how congestion control
works in NDN or CCNx. Unlike the IP protocol family, which relies
exclusively on end-to-end congestion control (e.g., TCP
\[[RFC0793](#RFC0793){.xref}\], DCCP \[[RFC4340](#RFC4340){.xref}\],
SCTP \[[RFC4960](#RFC4960){.xref}\], and QUIC
\[[RFC9000](#RFC9000){.xref}\]), CCNx and NDN can employ hop-by-hop
congestion control. There is per-Interest/Data state at every hop of the
path, and therefore outstanding Interests provide information that can
be used to optimize resource allocation for data returning on the
inverse path, such as bandwidth sharing, prioritization, and overload
control. In current designs, this allocation is often done using
Interest counting. By accepting one Interest packet from a downstream
node, this implicitly provides a guarantee (either hard or soft) that
there is sufficient bandwidth on the inverse direction of the link to
send back one Data packet. A number of congestion control schemes have
been developed for ICN that operate in this fashion, for example,
\[[Wang2013](#Wang2013){.xref}\],
\[[Mahdian2016](#Mahdian2016){.xref}\],
\[[Song2018](#Song2018){.xref}\], and
\[[Carofiglio2012](#Carofiglio2012){.xref}\]. Other schemes, like
\[[Schneider2016](#Schneider2016){.xref}\], neither count nor police
Interests but instead monitor queues using AQM (active queue management)
to mark returning Data packets that have experienced congestion. This
later class of schemes is similar to those used on IP in the sense that
they depend on consumers adequately reducing their rate of Interest
injection to avoid Data packet drops due to buffer overflow in
forwarders. The former class of schemes is (arguably) more robust
against misbehavior by consumers.[¶](#section-3.2-3){.pilcrow}

Given the stochastic nature of RTTs, and the ubiquity of wireless links
and encapsulation tunnels with variable bandwidth, a simple scheme that
admits Interests only based on a time-invariant estimate of the
returning link bandwidth will perform poorly. However, two
characteristics of NDN and CCNx-like protocols can help substantially to
improve the accuracy and responsiveness of the bandwidth
allocation:[¶](#section-3.2-4){.pilcrow}

1.  [RTT is bounded by the inclusion of an *Interest Lifetime* in each
    Interest message, which puts an upper bound on the RTT uncertainty
    for any given Interest/Data exchange. If Interest Lifetimes are kept
    reasonably short (a few RTTs), the allocation of local forwarder
    resources do not have to deal with an arbitrarily long tail. One
    could in fact do a deterministic allocation on this basis, but the
    result would be highly pessimistic. Nevertheless, having a cutoff
    does improve the performance of an optimistic allocation
    scheme.[¶](#section-3.2-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-5.1}
2.  [A congestion marking scheme like that used in Explicit Congestion
    Notification (ECN) can be used to mark returning Data packets if the
    inverse link starts experiencing long queue occupancy or other
    congestion indication. Unlike TCP/IP, where the rate adjustment can
    only be done end-to-end, this feedback is usable immediately by the
    downstream ICN forwarder, and the Interest shaping rate is lowered
    after a single link RTT. This may allow rate adjustment schemes that
    are less pessimistic than the Additive Increase, Multiplicative
    Decrease (AIMD) scheme with .5 multiplier that is commonly used on
    TCP/IP networks. It also allows the rate adjustments to be spread
    more accurately among the Interest/Data flows traversing a link
    sending congestion
    signals.[¶](#section-3.2-5.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-5.2}

A useful discussion of these properties and how they demonstrate the
advantages of ICN approaches to congestion control can be found in
\[[Carofiglio2016](#Carofiglio2016){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.2-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#basics}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [What Can We Control to Achieve QoS in ICN?](#name-what-can-we-control-to-achi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-what-can-we-control-to-achi}

QoS is achieved through managed unfairness in the allocation of
resources in network elements, particularly in the routers that forward
ICN packets. Hence, the first-order questions are the following: Which
resources need to be allocated? How do you ascertain which traffic gets
those allocations? In the case of CCNx or NDN, the important network
element resources are given in [Table
2](#ICNresources){.xref}:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-icn-related-network-element}

::: {#ICNresources}
  Resource                      ICN Usage
  ----------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------
  Communication link capacity   buffering for queued packets
  CS capacity                   to hold cached data
  Forwarder memory              for the PIT
  Compute capacity              for forwarding packets, including the cost of FIB lookups

  : [Table 2](#table-2){.selfRef}: [ICN-Related Network Element
  Resources](#name-icn-related-network-element){.selfRef}
:::

For these resources, any QoS scheme has to specify two
things:[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}

1.  [How do you create *equivalence classes* (a.k.a. flows) of traffic
    to which different QoS treatments are
    applied?[¶](#section-4-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-4.1}
2.  [What are the possible treatments and how are those mapped to the
    resource allocation
    algorithms?[¶](#section-4-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-4.2}

Two critical facts of life come into play when designing a QoS scheme.
First, the number of equivalence classes that can be simultaneously
tracked in a network element is bounded by both memory and processing
capacity to do the necessary lookups. One can allow very fine-grained
equivalence classes but not be able to employ them globally because of
scaling limits of core routers. That means it is wise to either restrict
the range of equivalence classes or allow them to be *aggregated*,
trading off accuracy in policing traffic against ability to
scale.[¶](#section-4-5){.pilcrow}

Second, the flexibility of expressible treatments can be tightly
constrained by both protocol encoding and algorithmic limitations. The
ability to encode the treatment requests in the protocol can be limited
\-- as it is for IP where there are only six of the Type of Service
(TOS) bits available for Diffserv treatments. However, an equal or more
important issue is whether there are practical traffic policing,
queuing, and pacing algorithms that can be combined to support a rich
set of QoS treatments.[¶](#section-4-6){.pilcrow}

The two considerations above in combination can easily be substantially
more expressive than what can be achieved in practice with the available
number of queues on real network interfaces or the amount of per-packet
computation needed to enqueue or dequeue a
packet.[¶](#section-4-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#ipisdifferent}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [How Does This Relate to QoS in TCP/IP?](#name-how-does-this-relate-to-qos){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-how-does-this-relate-to-qos}

TCP/IP has fewer resource types to manage than ICN, and in some cases,
the allocation methods are simpler, as shown in [Table
3](#TCPIPresources){.xref}:[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-ip-related-network-element-}

::: {#TCPIPresources}
  Resource                      IP Relevant   TCP/IP Usage
  ----------------------------- ------------- ------------------------------------------------------------
  Communication link capacity   YES           buffering for queued packets
  CS capacity                   NO            no CS in IP
  Forwarder memory              MAYBE         not needed for output-buffered designs (see note below)
  Compute capacity              YES           for forwarding packets, but arguably much cheaper than ICN

  : [Table 3](#table-3){.selfRef}: [IP-Related Network Element
  Resources](#name-ip-related-network-element-){.selfRef}
:::

Note: In an output-buffered design, all packet buffering resources are
associated with the output interfaces, and neither the receiver
interface nor the internal forwarding buffers can be over-subscribed.
Output-buffered switches or routers are common but not universal, as
they generally require an internal speedup factor where forwarding
capacity is greater than the sum of the input capacity of the
interfaces.[¶](#section-5-3.1){.pilcrow}

For these resources, IP has specified three fundamental things, as shown
in [Table 4](#IPQoSspecifiers){.xref}:[¶](#section-5-4){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-fundamental-protocol-elemen}

::: {#IPQoSspecifiers}
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| What                              | How                               |
+===================================+===================================+
| Equivalence classes               | subset+prefix match on IP 5-tuple |
|                                   | {SA,DA,SP,DP,PT}\                 |
|                                   | SA=Source Address\                |
|                                   | DA=Destination Address\           |
|                                   | SP=Source Port\                   |
|                                   | DP=Destination Port\              |
|                                   | PT=IP Protocol                    |
|                                   | Type[¶                            |
|                                   | ](#section-5-5.2.1.2.1){.pilcrow} |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Diffserv treatments               | (very) small number of            |
|                                   | globally-agreed traffic classes   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Intserv treatments                | per-flow parameterized            |
|                                   | *Controlled Load* and             |
|                                   | *Guaranteed* service classes      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

: [Table 4](#table-4){.selfRef}: [Fundamental Protocol Elements to
Achieve QoS for TCP/IP](#name-fundamental-protocol-elemen){.selfRef}
:::

Equivalence classes for IP can be pairwise, by matching against both
source and destination address+port, pure group using only destination
address+port, or source-specific multicast with source address+port and
destination multicast address+port.[¶](#section-5-6){.pilcrow}

With Intserv, RSVP \[[RFC2205](#RFC2205){.xref}\] carries two data
structures: the Flow Specifier (FLOWSPEC) and the Traffic Specifier
(TSPEC). The former fulfills the requirement to identify the equivalence
class to which the QoS being signaled applies. The latter comprises the
desired QoS treatment along with a description of the dynamic character
of the traffic (e.g., average bandwidth and delay, peak bandwidth,
etc.). Both of these encounter substantial scaling limits, which has
meant that Intserv has historically been limited to confined topologies,
and/or high-value usages, like traffic
engineering.[¶](#section-5-7){.pilcrow}

With Diffserv, the protocol encoding (six bits in the TOS field of the
IP header) artificially limits the number of classes one can specify.
These are documented in \[[RFC4594](#RFC4594){.xref}\]. Nonetheless,
when used with fine-grained equivalence classes, one still runs into
limits on the number of queues required.[¶](#section-5-8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#icnisdifferent}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Why Is ICN Different? Can We Do Better?](#name-why-is-icn-different-can-we){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-why-is-icn-different-can-we}

While one could adopt an approach to QoS that mirrors the extensive
experience with TCP/IP, this would, in the author\'s view, be a mistake.
The implementation and deployment of QoS in IP networks has been spotty
at best. There are, of course, economic and political reasons as well as
technical reasons for these mixed results, but there are several
architectural choices in ICN that make it a potentially much better
protocol base to enhance with QoS machinery. This section discusses
those differences and their consequences.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#icnflows}
::: {#section-6.1 .section}
### [6.1.](#section-6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Equivalence Class Capabilities](#name-equivalence-class-capabilit){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-equivalence-class-capabilit}

First and foremost, hierarchical names are a much richer basis for
specifying equivalence classes than IP 5-tuples. The IP address (or
prefix) can only separate traffic by topology to the granularity of
hosts and cannot express actual computational instances nor sets of
data. Ports give some degree of per-instance demultiplexing, but this
tends to be both coarse and ephemeral, while confounding the
demultiplexing function with the assignment of QoS treatments to
particular subsets of the data. Some degree of finer granularity is
possible with IPv6 by exploiting the ability to use up to 64 bits of
address for classifying traffic. In fact, the Hybrid Information-Centric
Networking (hICN) project
\[[HICN](#I-D.muscariello-intarea-hicn){.xref}\], while adopting the
request-response model of CCNx, uses IPv6 addresses as the available
namespace, and IPv6 packets (plus \"fake\" TCP headers) as the wire
format.[¶](#section-6.1-1){.pilcrow}

Nonetheless, the flexibility of tokenized (i.e., strings treated as
opaque tokens), variable length, hierarchical names allows one to
directly associate classes of traffic for QoS purposes with the
structure of an application namespace. The classification can be as
coarse or fine-grained as desired by the application. While not *always*
the case, there is typically a straightforward association between how
objects are named and how they are grouped together for common
treatment. Examples abound; a number can be conveniently found in
\[[FLOWCLASS](#I-D.moiseenko-icnrg-flowclass){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6.2 .section}
### [6.2.](#section-6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Topology Interactions with QoS](#name-topology-interactions-with-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-topology-interactions-with-}

In ICN, QoS is not pre-bound to network topology since names are
non-topological, unlike unicast IP addresses. This allows QoS to be
applied to multi-destination and multipath environments in a
straightforward manner, rather than requiring either multicast with
coarse class-based scheduling or complex signaling like that in RSVP
Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE) \[[RFC3209](#RFC3209){.xref}\] that is
needed to make point-to-multipoint Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS)
work.[¶](#section-6.2-1){.pilcrow}

Because of IP\'s stateless forwarding model, complicated by the ubiquity
of asymmetric routes, any flow-based QoS requires state that is
decoupled from the actual arrival of traffic and hence must be
maintained, at least as soft state, even during quiescent periods.
Intserv, for example, requires flow signaling on the order of O(number
of flows). ICN, even worst case, requires order of O(number of active
Interest/Data exchanges), since state can be instantiated on arrival of
an Interest and removed (perhaps lazily) once the data has been
returned.[¶](#section-6.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#qostreatments}
::: {#section-6.3 .section}
### [6.3.](#section-6.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Specification of QoS Treatments](#name-specification-of-qos-treatm){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-specification-of-qos-treatm}

Unlike Intserv, Diffserv eschews signaling in favor of class-based
configuration of resources and queues in network elements. However,
Diffserv limits traffic treatments to a few bits taken from the TOS
field of IP. No such wire encoding limitations exist for NDN or CCNx, as
the protocol is completely TLV (Type-Length-Value) based, and one (or
even more than one) new field can be easily defined to carry QoS
treatment information.[¶](#section-6.3-1){.pilcrow}

Therefore, there are greenfield possibilities for more powerful QoS
treatment options in ICN. For example, IP has no way to express a QoS
treatment like \"try hard to deliver reliably, even at the expense of
delay or bandwidth\". Such a QoS treatment for ICN could invoke native
ICN mechanisms, none of which are present in IP, such as the
following:[¶](#section-6.3-2){.pilcrow}

-   [Retransmitting in-network in response to hop-by-hop errors returned
    from upstream
    forwarders[¶](#section-6.3-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3-3.1}
-   [Trying multiple paths to multiple content sources either in
    parallel or
    serially[¶](#section-6.3-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3-3.2}
-   [Assigning higher precedence for short-term caching to recover from
    downstream (see note below)
    errors[¶](#section-6.3-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3-3.3}
-   [Coordinating cache utilization with forwarding
    resources[¶](#section-6.3-3.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3-3.4}

Note: *Downstream* refers to the direction Data messages flow toward the
consumer (the issuer of Interests). Conversely, *Upstream* refers to the
direction Interests flow toward the producer of
data.[¶](#section-6.3-4.1){.pilcrow}

Such mechanisms are typically described in NDN and CCNx as *forwarding
strategies*. However, there is little or no guidance for which
application actions or protocol machinery a forwarder should use to
select the appropriate forwarding strategy for arriving Interest
messages. See \[[BenAbraham2018](#BenAbraham2018){.xref}\] for an
investigation of these issues. Associating forwarding strategies with
the equivalence classes and QoS treatments directly can make them more
accessible and useful to implement and
deploy.[¶](#section-6.3-5){.pilcrow}

Stateless forwarding and asymmetric routing in IP limits available
state/feedback to manage link resources. In contrast, NDN or CCNx
forwarding allows all link resource allocation to occur as part of
Interest forwarding, potentially simplifying things considerably. In
particular, with symmetric routing, producers have no control over the
paths their Data packets traverse; hence, any QoS treatments intended to
influence routing paths from producer to consumer will have no
effect.[¶](#section-6.3-6){.pilcrow}

One complication in the handling of ICN QoS treatments is not present in
IP and hence worth mentioning. CCNx and NDN both perform *Interest
aggregation* (see [Section
2.4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8569#section-2.4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8569](#RFC8569){.xref}\]). If an Interest arrives matching an
existing PIT entry, but with a different QoS treatment from an Interest
already forwarded, it can be tricky to decide whether to aggregate the
Interest or forward it, and how to keep track of the differing QoS
treatments for the two Interests. Exploration of the details surrounding
these situations is beyond the scope of this document; further
discussion can be found for the general case of flow balance and
congestion control in
\[[FLOWBALANCE](#I-D.oran-icnrg-flowbalance){.xref}\] and specifically
for QoS treatments in
\[[DNC-QOS-ICN](#I-D.anilj-icnrg-dnc-qos-icn){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.3-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6.4 .section}
### [6.4.](#section-6.4){.section-number .selfRef} [ICN Forwarding Semantics Effect on QoS](#name-icn-forwarding-semantics-ef){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-icn-forwarding-semantics-ef}

IP has three forwarding semantics, with different QoS needs (Unicast,
Anycast, Multicast). ICN has the single forwarding semantic, so any QoS
machinery can be uniformly applied across any request/response
invocation. This applies whether the forwarder employs dynamic
destination routing, multi-destination forwarding with next hops tried
serially, multi-destination with next hops used in parallel, or even
localized flooding (e.g., directly on Layer 2 multicast mechanisms).
Additionally, the pull-based model of ICN avoids a number of thorny
multicast QoS problems that IP has (see
\[[Wang2000](#Wang2000){.xref}\], \[[RFC3170](#RFC3170){.xref}\], and
\[[Tseng2003](#Tseng2003){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-6.4-1){.pilcrow}

The Multi-destination/multipath forwarding model in ICN changes resource
allocation needs in a fairly deep way. IP treats all endpoints as
open-loop packet sources, whereas NDN and CCNx have strong asymmetry
between producers and consumers as packet
sources.[¶](#section-6.4-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-6.5 .section}
### [6.5.](#section-6.5){.section-number .selfRef} [QoS Interactions with Caching](#name-qos-interactions-with-cachi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-qos-interactions-with-cachi}

IP has no caching in routers, whereas ICN needs ways to allocate cache
resources. Treatments to control caching operation are unlikely to look
much like the treatments used to control link resources. NDN and CCNx
already have useful cache control directives associated with Data
messages. The CCNx controls include the
following:[¶](#section-6.5-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

ExpiryTime:
:   time after which a cached Content Object is considered expired and
    [MUST]{.bcp14} no longer be used to respond to an Interest from a
    cache.[¶](#section-6.5-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Recommended Cache Time:
:   time after which the publisher considers the Content Object to be of
    low value to cache.[¶](#section-6.5-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

See \[[RFC8569](#RFC8569){.xref}\] for the formal
definitions.[¶](#section-6.5-3){.pilcrow}

ICN flow classifiers, such as those in
\[[FLOWCLASS](#I-D.moiseenko-icnrg-flowclass){.xref}\] can be used to
achieve soft or hard partitioning (see note below) of cache resources in
the CS of an ICN forwarder. For example, cached content for a given
equivalence class can be considered *fate shared* in a cache whereby
objects from the same equivalence class can be purged as a group rather
than individually. This can recover cache space more quickly and at
lower overhead than pure per-object replacement when a cache is under
extreme pressure and in danger of thrashing. In addition, since the
forwarder remembers the QoS treatment for each pending Interest in its
PIT, the above cache controls can be augmented by policy to prefer
retention of cached content for some equivalence classes as part of the
cache replacement algorithm.[¶](#section-6.5-4){.pilcrow}

Note: With hard partitioning, there are dedicated cache resources for
each equivalence class (or enumerated list of equivalence classes). With
soft partitioning, resources are at least partly shared among the (sets
of) equivalence classes of traffic.[¶](#section-6.5-5.1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#principles}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Strawman Principles for an ICN QoS Architecture](#name-strawman-principles-for-an-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-strawman-principles-for-an-}

Based on the observations made in the earlier sections, this summary
section captures the author\'s ideas for clear and actionable
architectural principles for incorporating QoS machinery into ICN
protocols like NDN and CCNx. Hopefully, they can guide further work and
focus effort on portions of the giant design space for QoS that have the
best trade-offs in terms of flexibility, simplicity, and
deployability.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

**Define equivalence classes using the name hierarchy rather than
creating an independent traffic class definition**. This directly
associates the specification of equivalence classes of traffic with the
structure of the application namespace. It can allow hierarchical
decomposition of equivalence classes in a natural way because of the way
hierarchical ICN names are constructed. Two practical mechanisms are
presented in \[[FLOWCLASS](#I-D.moiseenko-icnrg-flowclass){.xref}\] with
different trade-offs between security and the ability to aggregate
flows. Either the prefix-based mechanism (the equivalence class
component count (EC3) scheme) or the explicit name component-based
mechanism (the equivalence class name component type (ECNCT) scheme), or
both, could be adopted as the part of the QoS architecture for defining
equivalence classes.[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}

**Put consumers in control of link and forwarding resource allocation**.
Base all link buffering and forwarding (both memory and CPU) resource
allocations on Interest arrivals. This is attractive because it provides
early congestion feedback to consumers and allows scheduling the reverse
link direction for carrying the matching data in advance. It makes
enforcement of QoS treatments a single-ended (i.e., at the consumer)
rather than a double-ended problem and can avoid wasting resources on
fetching data that will be dropped when it arrives at a bottleneck
link.[¶](#section-7-3){.pilcrow}

**Allow producers to influence the allocation of cache resources**.
Producers want to affect caching decisions in order to do the
following:[¶](#section-7-4){.pilcrow}

-   [Shed load by having Interests served by CSes in forwarders before
    they reach the producer
    itself[¶](#section-7-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-5.1}
-   [Survive transient producer reachability or link outages close to
    the producer[¶](#section-7-5.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-5.2}

For caching to be effective, individual Data objects in an equivalence
class need to have similar treatment; otherwise, well-known
cache-thrashing pathologies due to self-interference emerge. Producers
have the most direct control over caching policies through the caching
directives in Data messages. It therefore makes sense to put the
producer, rather than the consumer or network operator, in charge of
specifying these equivalence classes.[¶](#section-7-6){.pilcrow}

See \[[FLOWCLASS](#I-D.moiseenko-icnrg-flowclass){.xref}\] for specific
mechanisms to achieve this.[¶](#section-7-7){.pilcrow}

**Allow consumers to influence the allocation of cache resources**.
Consumers want to affect caching decisions in order to do the
following:[¶](#section-7-8){.pilcrow}

-   [Reduce latency for retrieving
    data[¶](#section-7-9.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-9.1}
-   [Survive transient outages of either a producer or links close to
    the consumer[¶](#section-7-9.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-9.2}

Consumers can have indirect control over caching by specifying QoS
treatments in their Interests. Consider the following potential QoS
treatments by consumers that can drive caching
policies:[¶](#section-7-10){.pilcrow}

-   [A QoS treatment requesting better robustness against transient
    disconnection can be used by a forwarder close to the consumer (or
    downstream of an unreliable link) to preferentially cache the
    corresponding data.[¶](#section-7-11.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-11.1}
-   [Conversely, a QoS treatment together with, or in addition to, a
    request for short latency indicating that the forwarder should only
    pay attention to the caching preferences of the producer because
    caching requested data would be ineffective (i.e., new data will be
    requested shortly).[¶](#section-7-11.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-11.2}
-   [A QoS treatment indicating that a mobile consumer will likely incur
    a mobility event within an RTT (or a few RTTs). Such a treatment
    would allow a mobile network operator to preferentially cache the
    data at a forwarder positioned at a *join point* or *rendezvous
    point* of their
    topology.[¶](#section-7-11.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-11.3}

**Give network operators the ability to match customer SLAs to cache
resource availability**. Network operators, whether closely tied
administratively to producer or consumer, or constituting an independent
transit administration, provide the storage resources in the ICN
forwarders. Therefore, they are the ultimate arbiters of how the cache
resources are managed. In addition to any local policies they may
enforce, the cache behavior from the QoS standpoint emerges from the
mapping of producer-specified equivalence classes onto cache space
availability, including whether cache entries are treated individually
or fate-shared. Forwarders also determine the mapping of
consumer-specified QoS treatments to the precedence used for retaining
Data objects in the cache.[¶](#section-7-12){.pilcrow}

Besides utilizing cache resources to meet the QoS goals of individual
producers and consumers, network operators also want to manage their
cache resources in order to do the
following:[¶](#section-7-13){.pilcrow}

-   [Ameliorate congestion hotspots by reducing load converging on
    producers they host on their
    network[¶](#section-7-14.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-14.1}
-   [Improve Interest satisfaction rates by utilizing caches as
    short-term retransmission buffers to recover from transient producer
    reachability problems, link errors, or link
    outages[¶](#section-7-14.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-14.2}
-   [Improve both latency and reliability in environments when consumers
    are mobile in the operator\'s
    topology[¶](#section-7-14.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-14.3}

**Rethink how to specify traffic treatments \-- don\'t just copy
Diffserv**. Some of the Diffserv classes may form a good starting point,
as their mappings onto queuing algorithms for managing link buffering
are well understood. However, Diffserv alone does not capture more
complex QoS treatments, such as:[¶](#section-7-15){.pilcrow}

-   [Trading off latency against
    reliability[¶](#section-7-16.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-16.1}
-   [Trading off resource usage against delivery probability through
    controlled flooding or other forwarding
    mechanisms[¶](#section-7-16.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-16.2}
-   [Allocating resources based on rich TSPEC-like traffic descriptions
    that appear in signaled QoS schemes like
    Intserv[¶](#section-7-16.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-16.3}

Here are some examples:[¶](#section-7-17){.pilcrow}

-   [A \"burst\" treatment, where an initial Interest gives an aggregate
    data size to request allocation of link capacity for a large burst
    of Interest/Data exchanges. The Interest can be rejected at any hop
    if the resources are not available. Such a treatment can also
    accommodate Data implosion produced by the discovery procedures of
    management protocols like
    \[[CCNINFO](#I-D.irtf-icnrg-ccninfo){.xref}\].[¶](#section-7-18.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-18.1}
-   [A \"reliable\" treatment, which affects preference for allocation
    of PIT space for the Interest and CS space for the Data in order to
    improve the robustness of IoT data delivery in a constrained
    environment, as is described in
    \[[IOTQOS](#I-D.gundogan-icnrg-iotqos){.xref}\].[¶](#section-7-18.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-18.2}
-   [A \"search\" treatment, which, within the specified Interest
    Lifetime, tries many paths either in parallel or serially to
    potentially many content sources, to maximize the probability that
    the requested item will be found. This is done at the expense of the
    extra bandwidth of both forwarding Interests and receiving multiple
    responses upstream of an aggregation point. The treatment can encode
    a value expressing trade-offs like breadth-first versus depth-first
    search, and bounds on the total resource expenditure. Such a
    treatment would be useful for instrumentation protocols like
    \[[ICNTRACEROUTE](#I-D.irtf-icnrg-icntraceroute){.xref}\].[¶](#section-7-18.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-7-18.3}

As an aside, loose latency control (on the order of seconds or tens of
milliseconds as opposed milliseconds or microseconds) can be achieved by
bounding Interest Lifetime as long as this lifetime machinery is not
also used as an application mechanism to provide subscriptions or to
establish path traces for producer mobility. See
\[[Krol2018](#Krol2018){.xref}\] for a discussion of the network versus
application timescale issues in ICN
protocols.[¶](#section-7-19.1){.pilcrow}

::: {#Intserv}
::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Can Intserv-Like Traffic Control in ICN Provide Richer QoS Semantics?](#name-can-intserv-like-traffic-co){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-can-intserv-like-traffic-co}

Basic QoS treatments such as those summarized above may not be adequate
to cover the whole range of application utility functions and deployment
environments we expect for ICN. While it is true that one does not
necessarily need a separate signaling protocol like RSVP given the state
carried in the ICN data plane by forwarders, simple QoS treatments
applied per Interest/Data exchanges lack some potentially important
capabilities. Intserv\'s richer QoS capabilities may be of value,
especially if they can be provided in ICN at lower complexity and
protocol overhead than Intserv plus RSVP.[¶](#section-7.1-1){.pilcrow}

There are three key capabilities missing from Diffserv-like QoS
treatments, no matter how sophisticated they may be in describing the
desired treatment for a given equivalence class of traffic. Intserv-like
QoS provides all of these:[¶](#section-7.1-2){.pilcrow}

1.  [The ability to **describe traffic flows** in a mathematically
    meaningful way. This is done through parameters like average rate,
    peak rate, and maximum burst size. The parameters are encapsulated
    in a data structure called a \"TSPEC\", which can be placed in
    whatever protocol needs the information (in the case of TCP/IP
    Intserv, this is
    RSVP).[¶](#section-7.1-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-3.1}
2.  [The ability to perform **admission control**, where the element
    requesting the QoS treatment can know *before* introducing traffic
    whether the network elements have agreed to provide the requested
    traffic treatment. An important side effect of providing this
    assurance is that the network elements install state that allows the
    forwarding and queuing machinery to police and shape the traffic in
    a way that provides a sufficient degree of *isolation* from the
    dynamic behavior of other traffic. Depending on the
    admission-control mechanism, it may or may not be possible to
    explicitly release that state when the application no longer needs
    the QoS treatment.[¶](#section-7.1-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-3.2}
3.  [The ability to specify the permissible **degree of divergence** in
    the actual traffic handling from the requested handling. Intserv
    provides two choices here: the *controlled load* service and the
    *guaranteed* service. The former allows stochastic deviation
    equivalent to what one would experience on an unloaded path of a
    packet network. The latter conforms to the TSPEC deterministically,
    at the obvious expense of demanding extremely conservative resource
    allocation.[¶](#section-7.1-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-3.3}

Given the limited applicability of these capabilities in today\'s
Internet, the author does not take any position as to whether any of
these Intserv-like capabilities are needed for ICN to be successful.
However, a few things seem important to consider. The following
paragraphs speculate about the consequences of incorporating these
features into the CCNx or NDN protocol
architectures.[¶](#section-7.1-4){.pilcrow}

Superficially, it would be quite straightforward to accommodate
Intserv-equivalent traffic descriptions in CCNx or NDN. One could define
a new TLV for the Interest message to carry a TSPEC. A forwarder
encountering this, together with a QoS treatment request (e.g., as
proposed in [Section 6.3](#qostreatments){.xref}), could associate the
traffic specification with the corresponding equivalence class derived
from the name in the Interest. This would allow the forwarder to create
state that not only would apply to the returning Data for that Interest
when being queued on the downstream interface but also be maintained as
soft state across multiple Interest/Data exchanges to drive policing and
shaping algorithms at per-flow granularity. The cost in Interest message
overhead would be modest; however, the complications associated with
managing different traffic specifications in different Interests for the
same equivalence class might be substantial. Of course, all the
scalability considerations with maintaining per-flow state also come
into play.[¶](#section-7.1-5){.pilcrow}

Similarly, it would be equally straightforward to have a way to express
the degree of divergence capability that Intserv provides through its
controlled load and guaranteed service definitions. This could either be
packaged with the traffic specification or encoded
separately.[¶](#section-7.1-6){.pilcrow}

In contrast to the above, performing admission control for ICN flows is
likely to be just as heavyweight as it is with IP using RSVP. The
dynamic multipath, multi-destination forwarding model of ICN makes
performing admission control particularly tricky. Just to
illustrate:[¶](#section-7.1-7){.pilcrow}

-   [Forwarding next-hop selection is not confined to single paths (or a
    few ECMP equivalent paths) as it is with IP, making it difficult to
    know where to install state in advance of the arrival of an Interest
    to forward.[¶](#section-7.1-8.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-8.1}
-   [As with point-to-multipoint complexities when using RSVP for
    MPLS-TE, state has to be installed to multiple producers over
    multiple paths before an admission-control algorithm can commit the
    resources and say \"yes\" to a consumer needing admission-control
    capabilities.[¶](#section-7.1-8.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-8.2}
-   [Knowing when to remove admission-control state is difficult in the
    absence of a heavyweight resource reservation protocol. Soft state
    timeout may or may not be an adequate
    answer.[¶](#section-7.1-8.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-8.3}

Despite the challenges above, it may be possible to craft an
admission-control scheme for ICN that achieves the desired QoS goals of
applications without the invention and deployment of a complex, separate
admission-control signaling protocol. There have been designs in earlier
network architectures that were capable of performing admission control
piggybacked on packet transmission.[¶](#section-7.1-9){.pilcrow}

The earliest example the author is aware of is
\[[Autonet](#Autonet){.xref}\].[¶](#section-7.1-10.1){.pilcrow}

Such a scheme might have the following general shape (**warning:**
serious hand-waving follows!):[¶](#section-7.1-11){.pilcrow}

-   [In addition to a QoS treatment and a traffic specification, an
    Interest requesting admission for the corresponding equivalence
    class would indicate this via a new TLV. It would also need to do
    the following: (a) indicate an expiration time after which any
    reserved resources can be released, and (b) indicate that caches be
    bypassed, so that the admission-control request arrives at a bona
    fide producer.[¶](#section-7.1-12.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-12.1}
-   [Each forwarder processing the Interest would check for resource
    availability. If the resources are not available, or the requested
    service is not feasible, the forwarder would reject the Interest
    with an admission-control failure. If resources are available, the
    forwarder would record the traffic specification as described above
    and forward the
    Interest.[¶](#section-7.1-12.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-12.2}
-   [If the Interest successfully arrives at a producer, the producer
    would return the requested
    Data.[¶](#section-7.1-12.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-12.3}
-   [Upon receiving the matching Data message and if the resources are
    still available, each on-path forwarder would allocate resources and
    would mark the admission control TLV as \"provisionally approved\".
    Conversely, if the resource reservation fails, the admission control
    would be marked \"failed\", although the Data would still be passed
    downstream.[¶](#section-7.1-12.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-12.4}
-   [Upon the Data message arrival, the consumer would know if admission
    succeeded or not, and subsequent Interests could rely on the QoS
    state being in place until either some failure occurs, or a topology
    or other forwarding change alters the forwarding path. To deal with
    this, additional machinery is needed to ensure subsequent Interests
    for an admitted flow either follow that path or an error is
    reported. One possibility (also useful in many other contexts), is
    to employ a *Path Steering* mechanism, such as the one described in
    \[[Moiseenko2017](#Moiseenko2017){.xref}\].[¶](#section-7.1-12.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-7.1-12.5}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

There are a few ways in which QoS for ICN interacts with security and
privacy issues. Since QoS addresses relationships among traffic rather
than the inherent characteristics of traffic, it neither enhances nor
degrades the security and privacy properties of the data being carried,
as long as the machinery does not alter or otherwise compromise the
basic security properties of the associated protocols. The QoS
approaches advocated here for ICN can serve to amplify existing threats
to network traffic. However:[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

-   [An attacker able to manipulate the QoS treatments of traffic can
    mount a more focused (and potentially more effective)
    denial-of-service attack by suppressing performance on traffic the
    attacker is targeting. Since the architecture here assumes QoS
    treatments are manipulatable hop-by-hop, any on-path adversary can
    wreak havoc. Note, however, that in basic ICN, an on-path attacker
    can do this and more by dropping, delaying, or misrouting traffic
    independent of any particular QoS machinery in
    use.[¶](#section-9-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-2.1}
-   [When equivalence classes of traffic are explicitly revealed via
    either names or other fields in packets, an attacker has yet one
    more handle to use to discover linkability of multiple
    requests.[¶](#section-9-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-2.2}
:::
:::

::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-10.1 .section}
### [10.1.](#section-10.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8569\]
:   [Mosko, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Solis, I.]{.refAuthor}, and [C.
    Wood]{.refAuthor}, [\"Content-Centric Networking (CCNx)
    Semantics\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8569]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8569]{.seriesInfo}, July 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8569>\>.
:   

\[RFC8609\]
:   [Mosko, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Solis, I.]{.refAuthor}, and [C.
    Wood]{.refAuthor}, [\"Content-Centric Networking (CCNx) Messages in
    TLV Format\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8609]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8609]{.seriesInfo}, July 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8609>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-10.2 .section}
### [10.2.](#section-10.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[AS\]
:   [Wikipedia]{.refAuthor}, [\"Autonomous system
    (Internet)\"]{.refTitle}, May 2021,
    \<<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Autonomous_system_(Internet)&oldid=1025244754>\>.
:   

\[Auge2018\]
:   [Augé, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Carofiglio, G.]{.refAuthor},
    [Grassi, G.]{.refAuthor}, [Muscariello, L.]{.refAuthor},
    [Pau, G.]{.refAuthor}, and [X. Zeng]{.refAuthor}, [\"MAP-Me:
    Managing Anchor-Less Producer Mobility in Content-Centric
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [in IEEE Transactions on Network and Service
    Management, Vol. 15, No. 2]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/TNSM.2018.2796720]{.seriesInfo}, June 2018,
    \<<https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8267132>\>.
:   

\[Autonet\]
:   [Schroeder, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Birrell, A.]{.refAuthor},
    [Burrows, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Murray, H.]{.refAuthor},
    [Needham, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Rodeheffer, T.]{.refAuthor},
    [Satterthwaite, E.]{.refAuthor}, and [C. Thacker]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Autonet: a High-speed, Self-configuring Local Area Network Using
    Point-to-point Links\"]{.refTitle}, [in IEEE Journal on Selected
    Areas in Communications, Vol. 9, No. 8]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/49.105178]{.seriesInfo}, October 1991,
    \<<https://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/Compaq-DEC/SRC-RR-59.pdf>\>.
:   

\[BenAbraham2018\]
:   [Ben Abraham, H.]{.refAuthor}, [Parwatikar, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [DeHart, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Dresher, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [P.
    Crowley]{.refAuthor}, [\"Decoupling Information and Connectivity via
    Information-Centric Transport\"]{.refTitle}, [in ICN \'18:
    Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Information-Centric
    Networking, Boston, MA, USA]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1145/3267955.3267963]{.seriesInfo}, September 2018,
    \<<https://conferences.sigcomm.org/acm-icn/2018/proceedings/icn18-final31.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Carofiglio2012\]
:   [Carofiglio, G.]{.refAuthor}, [Gallo, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [L.
    Muscariello]{.refAuthor}, [\"Joint Hop-by-hop and Receiver-Driven
    Interest Control Protocol for Content-Centric
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [in ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
    Review]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1145/2377677.2377772]{.seriesInfo},
    September 2012,
    \<<http://conferences.sigcomm.org/sigcomm/2012/paper/icn/p37.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Carofiglio2016\]
:   [Carofiglio, G.]{.refAuthor}, [Gallo, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [L.
    Muscariello]{.refAuthor}, [\"Optimal multipath congestion control
    and request forwarding in information-centric networks: Protocol
    design and experimentation\"]{.refTitle}, [in Computer Networks,
    Vol. 110]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1016/j.comnet.2016.09.012]{.seriesInfo}, December 2016,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2016.09.012>\>.
:   

\[CCNINFO\]
:   [Asaeda, H.]{.refAuthor}, [Ooka, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [X.
    Shao]{.refAuthor}, [\"CCNinfo: Discovering Content and Network
    Information in Content-Centric Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-irtf-icnrg-ccninfo-06]{.seriesInfo}, 9 March 2021,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-icnrg-ccninfo-06>\>.
:   

\[DNC-QOS-ICN\]
:   [Jangam, A., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Suthar, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Stolic]{.refAuthor}, [\"QoS Treatments in ICN using Disaggregated
    Name Components\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-anilj-icnrg-dnc-qos-icn-02]{.seriesInfo}, 9
    March 2020,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-anilj-icnrg-dnc-qos-icn-02>\>.
:   

\[FLOWBALANCE\]
:   [Oran, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Maintaining CCNx or NDN flow balance with
    highly variable data object sizes\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-oran-icnrg-flowbalance-05]{.seriesInfo}, 14 February 2021,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-oran-icnrg-flowbalance-05>\>.
:   

\[FLOWCLASS\]
:   [Moiseenko, I.]{.refAuthor} and [D. Oran]{.refAuthor}, [\"Flow
    Classification in Information Centric Networking\"]{.refTitle},
    [Work in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-moiseenko-icnrg-flowclass-07]{.seriesInfo}, 13 January 2021,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-moiseenko-icnrg-flowclass-07>\>.
:   

\[HICN\]
:   [Muscariello, L.]{.refAuthor}, [Carofiglio, G.]{.refAuthor},
    [Augé, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Papalini, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Sardara]{.refAuthor}, [\"Hybrid Information-Centric
    Networking\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-muscariello-intarea-hicn-04]{.seriesInfo}, 20
    May 2020,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-muscariello-intarea-hicn-04>\>.
:   

\[ICNTRACEROUTE\]
:   [Mastorakis, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Gibson, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Moiseenko, I.]{.refAuthor}, [Droms, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [D. R.
    Oran]{.refAuthor}, [\"ICN Traceroute Protocol
    Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-irtf-icnrg-icntraceroute-02]{.seriesInfo}, 11
    April 2021,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-icnrg-icntraceroute-02>\>.
:   

\[IOTQOS\]
:   [Gundogan, C.]{.refAuthor}, [Schmidt, T. C.]{.refAuthor},
    [Waehlisch, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Frey, M.]{.refAuthor},
    [Shzu-Juraschek, F.]{.refAuthor}, and [J. Pfender]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Quality of Service for ICN in the IoT\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-gundogan-icnrg-iotqos-01]{.seriesInfo}, 8 July 2019,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-gundogan-icnrg-iotqos-01>\>.
:   

\[Krol2018\]
:   [Król, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Habak, K.]{.refAuthor},
    [Oran, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Kutscher, D.]{.refAuthor}, and [I.
    Psaras]{.refAuthor}, [\"RICE: Remote Method Invocation in
    ICN\"]{.refTitle}, [in ICN \'18: Proceedings of the 5th ACM
    Conference on Information-Centric Networking, Boston, MA,
    USA]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1145/3267955.3267956]{.seriesInfo},
    September 2018,
    \<<https://conferences.sigcomm.org/acm-icn/2018/proceedings/icn18-final9.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Mahdian2016\]
:   [Mahdian, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Arianfar, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Gibson, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [D. Oran]{.refAuthor}, [\"MIRCC:
    Multipath-aware ICN Rate-based Congestion Control\"]{.refTitle}, [in
    ACM-ICN \'16: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on
    Information-Centric Networking]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1145/2984356.2984365]{.seriesInfo}, September 2016,
    \<<http://conferences2.sigcomm.org/acm-icn/2016/proceedings/p1-mahdian.pdf>\>.
:   

\[minmaxfairness\]
:   [Wikipedia]{.refAuthor}, [\"Max-min fairness\"]{.refTitle}, June
    2021,
    \<<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Max-min_fairness&oldid=1028246910>\>.
:   

\[Moiseenko2017\]
:   [Moiseenko, I.]{.refAuthor} and [D. Oran]{.refAuthor}, [\"Path
    Switching in Content Centric and Named Data Networks\"]{.refTitle},
    [in ICN \'17: Proceedings of the 4th ACM Conference on
    Information-Centric Networking]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1145/3125719.3125721]{.seriesInfo}, September 2017,
    \<<https://conferences.sigcomm.org/acm-icn/2017/proceedings/icn17-2.pdf>\>.
:   

\[NDN\]
:   [\"Named Data Networking: Executive Summary\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://named-data.net/project/execsummary/>\>.
:   

\[NDNTutorials\]
:   [\"NDN Tutorials\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://named-data.net/publications/tutorials/>\>.
:   

\[NWC-CCN-REQS\]
:   [Matsuzono, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Asaeda, H.]{.refAuthor}, and [C.
    Westphal]{.refAuthor}, [\"Network Coding for Content-Centric
    Networking / Named Data Networking: Considerations and
    Challenges\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-irtf-nwcrg-nwc-ccn-reqs-05]{.seriesInfo}, 22
    January 2021,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-nwcrg-nwc-ccn-reqs-05>\>.
:   

\[Oran2018QoSslides\]
:   [Oran, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Thoughts on Quality of Service for
    NDN/CCN-style ICN protocol architectures\"]{.refTitle}, [presented
    at ICNRG Interim Meeting, Cambridge, MA]{.refContent}, 24 September
    2018,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/interim-2018-icnrg-03/materials/slides-interim-2018-icnrg-03-sessa-thoughts-on-qos-for-ndnccn-style-icn-protocol-architectures>\>.
:   

\[proportionalfairness\]
:   [Wikipedia]{.refAuthor}, [\"Proportional-fair
    scheduling\"]{.refTitle}, June 2021,
    \<<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proportional-fair_scheduling&oldid=1027073289>\>.
:   

\[RFC0793\]
:   [Postel, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Transmission Control
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 7]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    793]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC0793]{.seriesInfo}, September
    1981, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc793>\>.
:   

\[RFC2205\]
:   [Braden, R., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Zhang, L.]{.refAuthor},
    [Berson, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Herzog, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [S.
    Jamin]{.refAuthor}, [\"Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) \--
    Version 1 Functional Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    2205]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2205]{.seriesInfo}, September
    1997, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2205>\>.
:   

\[RFC2474\]
:   [Nichols, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Blake, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Baker, F.]{.refAuthor}, and [D. Black]{.refAuthor}, [\"Definition
    of the Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6
    Headers\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2474]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2474]{.seriesInfo}, December 1998,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2474>\>.
:   

\[RFC2998\]
:   [Bernet, Y.]{.refAuthor}, [Ford, P.]{.refAuthor},
    [Yavatkar, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Baker, F.]{.refAuthor},
    [Zhang, L.]{.refAuthor}, [Speer, M.]{.refAuthor},
    [Braden, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Davie, B.]{.refAuthor},
    [Wroclawski, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [E. Felstaine]{.refAuthor}, [\"A
    Framework for Integrated Services Operation over Diffserv
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2998]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2998]{.seriesInfo}, November 2000,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2998>\>.
:   

\[RFC3170\]
:   [Quinn, B.]{.refAuthor} and [K. Almeroth]{.refAuthor}, [\"IP
    Multicast Applications: Challenges and Solutions\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    3170]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC3170]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2001, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3170>\>.
:   

\[RFC3209\]
:   [Awduche, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Berger, L.]{.refAuthor},
    [Gan, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Li, T.]{.refAuthor},
    [Srinivasan, V.]{.refAuthor}, and [G. Swallow]{.refAuthor},
    [\"RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    3209]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC3209]{.seriesInfo}, December
    2001, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3209>\>.
:   

\[RFC4340\]
:   [Kohler, E.]{.refAuthor}, [Handley, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [S.
    Floyd]{.refAuthor}, [\"Datagram Congestion Control Protocol
    (DCCP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4340]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4340]{.seriesInfo}, March 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4340>\>.
:   

\[RFC4594\]
:   [Babiarz, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Chan, K.]{.refAuthor}, and [F.
    Baker]{.refAuthor}, [\"Configuration Guidelines for DiffServ Service
    Classes\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4594]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4594]{.seriesInfo}, August 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4594>\>.
:   

\[RFC4960\]
:   [Stewart, R., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Stream Control Transmission
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4960]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4960]{.seriesInfo}, September 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4960>\>.
:   

\[RFC9000\]
:   [Iyengar, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor} and [M. Thomson, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"QUIC: A UDP-Based Multiplexed and Secure Transport\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 9000]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC9000]{.seriesInfo}, May
    2021, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9000>\>.
:   

\[Schneider2016\]
:   [Schneider, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Yi, C.]{.refAuthor},
    [Zhang, B.]{.refAuthor}, and [L. Zhang]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Practical
    Congestion Control Scheme for Named Data Networking\"]{.refTitle},
    [in ACM-ICN \'16: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on
    Information-Centric Networking]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1145/2984356.2984369]{.seriesInfo}, September 2016,
    \<<http://conferences2.sigcomm.org/acm-icn/2016/proceedings/p21-schneider.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Shenker2006\]
:   [Shenker, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Fundamental design issues for the
    future Internet\"]{.refTitle}, [in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
    Communications, Vol. 13, No. 7]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/49.414637]{.seriesInfo}, September 2006,
    \<<https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1109/49.414637>\>.
:   

\[Song2018\]
:   [Song, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Lee, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [T.
    Kwon]{.refAuthor}, [\"SMIC: Subflow-level Multi-path Interest
    Control for Information Centric Networking\"]{.refTitle}, [ICN \'18:
    Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Information-Centric
    Networking]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1145/3267955.3267971]{.seriesInfo}, September 2018,
    \<<https://conferences.sigcomm.org/acm-icn/2018/proceedings/icn18-final62.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Tseng2003\]
:   [Tseng, C.-J.]{.refAuthor} and [C.-H. Chen]{.refAuthor}, [\"The
    performance of QoS-aware IP multicast routing
    protocols\"]{.refTitle}, [in Networks, Vol. 42]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1002/net.10084]{.seriesInfo}, September 2003,
    \<<https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/net.10084>\>.
:   

\[Wang2000\]
:   [Wang, B.]{.refAuthor} and [J. C. Hou]{.refAuthor}, [\"Multicast
    routing and its QoS extension: problems, algorithms, and
    protocols\"]{.refTitle}, [in IEEE Network, Vol. 14, Issue
    1]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1109/65.819168]{.seriesInfo}, January 2000,
    \<<https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/819168>\>.
:   

\[Wang2013\]
:   [Wang, Y.]{.refAuthor}, [Rozhnova, N.]{.refAuthor},
    [Narayanan, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Oran, D.]{.refAuthor}, and [I.
    Rhee]{.refAuthor}, [\"An improved Hop-by-hop Interest Shaper for
    Congestion Control in Named Data Networking\"]{.refTitle}, [in ACM
    SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1145/2534169.2491233]{.seriesInfo}, August 2013,
    \<<https://conferences.sigcomm.org/sigcomm/2013/papers/icn/p55.pdf>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Author\'s Address](#name-authors-address){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-address}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Dave Oran]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Network Systems Research and Design]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[4 Shady Hill Square]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cambridge]{.locality}, [MA]{.region} [02138]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <daveoran@orandom.net>
:::
:::
:::
