  RFC 9075        IAB COVID-19 Workshop 2020   July 2021
  --------------- ---------------------------- -----------
  Arkko, et al.   Informational                \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Architecture Board (IAB)

RFC:
:   [9075](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9075){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   July 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Arkko
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Farrell
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Kühlewind
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    C. Perkins
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9075 {#rfcnum}

# Report from the IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 2020 {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

The Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic caused changes in Internet
user behavior, particularly during the introduction of initial
quarantine and work-from-home arrangements. These behavior changes drove
changes in Internet traffic.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}

The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) held a workshop to discuss network
impacts of the pandemic on November 9-13, 2020. The workshop was held to
convene interested researchers, network operators, network management
experts, and Internet technologists to share their experiences. The
meeting was held online given the ongoing travel and contact
restrictions at that time.[¶](#section-abstract-2){.pilcrow}

Note that this document is a report on the proceedings of the workshop.
The views and positions documented in this report are those of the
workshop participants and do not necessarily reflect IAB views and
positions.[¶](#section-abstract-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) and
represents information that the IAB has deemed valuable to provide for
permanent record. It represents the consensus of the Internet
Architecture Board (IAB). Documents approved for publication by the IAB
are not candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of
RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9075>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Scope](#name-scope){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Workshop Topics and
    Discussion](#name-workshop-topics-and-discuss){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [Measurement-Based Observations on
        Network Traffic
        Dynamics](#name-measurement-based-observati){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.1}
            [3.1.1](#section-3.1.1){.xref}.  [Overall Traffic
            Growth](#name-overall-traffic-growth){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.2}
            [3.1.2](#section-3.1.2){.xref}.  [Changes in Application
            Use](#name-changes-in-application-use){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.3}
            [3.1.3](#section-3.1.3){.xref}.  [Mobile Networks and
            Mobility](#name-mobile-networks-and-mobilit){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.4}
            [3.1.4](#section-3.1.4){.xref}.  [A Deeper Look at
            Interconnections](#name-a-deeper-look-at-interconne){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.5}
            [3.1.5](#section-3.1.5){.xref}.  [Cloud
            Platforms](#name-cloud-platforms){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.6}
            [3.1.6](#section-3.1.6){.xref}.  [Last-Mile
            Congestion](#name-last-mile-congestion){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.7}
            [3.1.7](#section-3.1.7){.xref}.  [User
            Behavior](#name-user-behavior){.xref}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [Operational Practices and
        Architectural
        Considerations](#name-operational-practices-and-a){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.1}
            [3.2.1](#section-3.2.1){.xref}.  [Digital
            Divide](#name-digital-divide){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.2}
            [3.2.2](#section-3.2.2){.xref}.  [Applications](#name-applications){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.3}
            [3.2.3](#section-3.2.3){.xref}.  [Observability](#name-observability){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.4}
            [3.2.4](#section-3.2.4){.xref}.  [Security](#name-security){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.5}
            [3.2.5](#section-3.2.5){.xref}.  [Discussion](#name-discussion){.xref}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3}
        [3.3](#section-3.3){.xref}.  [Conclusions](#name-conclusions){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Feedback on Meeting
    Format](#name-feedback-on-meeting-format){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Position
    Papers](#name-position-papers){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Program
    Committee](#name-program-committee){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Informative
    References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [Appendix A](#appendix-A){.xref}.  [Workshop
    Participants](#name-workshop-participants){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[IAB Members at the Time of
    Approval](#name-iab-members-at-the-time-of-){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#appendix-C){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#appendix-D){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#introduction}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) held a workshop to discuss network
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on November 9-13, 2020. The workshop
was held to convene interested researchers, network operators, network
management experts, and Internet technologists to share their
experiences. The meeting was held online given the ongoing travel and
contact restrictions at that time.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

COVID-19 has caused changes in user behavior, which in turn drove
changes in Internet traffic. These changes in user behavior appeared
rather abruptly and were significant, in particular during the
introduction of initial quarantine and work-from-home arrangements. This
caused changes in Internet traffic in terms of volume and location, as
well as shifts in the types of applications used. This shift in traffic
and user behavior also created a shift in security practices as well as
attack patterns that made use of the attack surface, resulting from the
shift to working from home in a global
crisis.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

An announcement for the workshop was sent out in July 2020 requesting
that interested parties submit position papers to the workshop program
committee. A total of 15 position papers were received from 33 authors
in total. The papers are listed in [Section 5](#positionpapers){.xref}.
In addition, several other types of contributions and pointers to
existing work were provided. A number of position papers referred to
parallel work being published in measurement-related academic
conferences.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Invitations for the workshop were sent out based on the position papers
and other expressions of interest. On the workshop conference calls were
46 participants, listed in [Appendix
A](#participants){.xref}.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

The workshop was held over the course of one week and hosted three
sessions covering i) measurements and observations, ii) operational and
security issues, and iii) future consideration and conclusions. As these
three sessions were scheduled on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, a
positive side effect was that the time in between the sessions could be
used for mailing list discussion and compilation of additional workshop
material.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#scope}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Scope](#name-scope){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-scope}

The COVID-19 pandemic has had a tremendous impact on people\'s lives as
well as societies and economies around the globe. But it also had a big
impact on networking. With large numbers of people working from home or
otherwise depending on the network for their daily lives, network
traffic volume has surged. Internet service providers and operators have
reported 20% or more traffic growth in a matter of weeks. Traffic at
Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) is similarly on the rise. Most forms of
network traffic have seen an increase, with conversational multimedia
traffic growing, in some cases, by more than 200%. And user time spent
on conferencing services has risen by an order of magnitude on some
conferencing platforms.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

In general, the Internet has coped relatively well with this traffic
growth. The situation is not perfect: there have also been some outages,
video quality reduction, and other issues. Nevertheless, it is
interesting to see how the technology, operators, and service providers
have been able to respond to large changes in traffic
patterns.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

Understanding what actually happened with Internet traffic is, of
course, interesting in its own right. How that impacted the user
experience or the intended function of the services is equally
interesting. Measurements of and reports on Internet traffic in 2020 are
therefore valuable. But it would also be interesting to understand what
types of network management and capacity expansion actions were taken in
general. Anecdotal evidence points to Internet and service providers
tracking how their services are used and, in many cases, adjusting
services to accommodate the new traffic patterns, from dynamic
allocation of computing resources to more complex
changes.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

The impacts of this crisis are also a potential opportunity to
understand the impact of traffic shifts and growth more generally to
prepare for future situations \-- crises or otherwise \-- that impact
networking, or to allow us to adjust the technology to be even better
suited to respond to changes.[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

The scope of this workshop, based on the call for contributions,
included:[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}

-   [measurements of traffic changes, user experience and problems,
    service performance, and other relevant
    aspects[¶](#section-2-6.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-6.1}
-   [discussion about the behind-the-scenes network management and
    expansion activities[¶](#section-2-6.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-6.2}
-   [sharing experiences in the fields of general Internet connectivity,
    conferencing, media/entertainment, and Internet
    infrastructure[¶](#section-2-6.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-6.3}
-   [lessons learned on preparedness and
    operations[¶](#section-2-6.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-6.4}
-   [lessons learned on Internet technology and
    architecture[¶](#section-2-6.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-6.5}
:::
:::

::: {#discussion-topics}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Workshop Topics and Discussion](#name-workshop-topics-and-discuss){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-workshop-topics-and-discuss}

::: {#measurement}
::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Measurement-Based Observations on Network Traffic Dynamics](#name-measurement-based-observati){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-measurement-based-observati}

The workshop started with a focus on measurements. A large portion of
the submitted papers presented and discussed measurement data, and these
submissions provided a good basis for a better understanding of the
situation, covering different angles and aspects of network traffic and
different kinds of networks.[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

Changes in Internet traffic due to the COVID-19 pandemic affected
different networks in various ways. Yet all networks saw some form of
change, be it a reduction in traffic, an increase in traffic, a change
in workday and weekend diurnal patterns, or a change in traffic classes.
Traffic volume, directionality ratios, and traffic origins and
destinations were radically different than from before
COVID-19.[¶](#section-3.1-2){.pilcrow}

At a high level, while traffic from home networks increased
significantly, for the traffic in mobile networks different trends were
observed. Either the traffic increased as well \-- for instance, in
locations where use of residential ISP services is less common \--
traffic decreased as a result of reduced population mobility. This
observed traffic decrease in mobile networks reflected rather the
opposite trend than what was observed in residential
ISPs.[¶](#section-3.1-3){.pilcrow}

While diurnal congestion at interconnect points as well in certain
last-mile networks was reported, mainly in March, no persistent
congestion was observed. Further, a downward trend in download
throughput to certain cloud regions was measured, which can probably be
explained by the increased use of cloud services. This gives another
indication that the scaling of shared resources in the Internet is
working reasonably well enough to handle even larger changes in traffic
as experienced during the first nearly global lockdown of the COVID-19
pandemic.[¶](#section-3.1-4){.pilcrow}

::: {#overall-traffic-growth}
::: {#section-3.1.1 .section}
#### [3.1.1.](#section-3.1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Overall Traffic Growth](#name-overall-traffic-growth){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-overall-traffic-growth}

The global pandemic has significantly accelerated the growth of data
traffic worldwide. Based on the measurement data of one ISP, three IXPs,
a metropolitan educational network, and a mobile operator, it was
observed at the beginning of the workshop
\[[Feldmann2020](#Feldmann2020){.xref}\] that, overall, the network was
able to handle the situation well despite a significant and sudden
increase in the traffic growth rate in March and April. That is, after
the lockdown was implemented in March, a traffic increase of 15-20% was
observed at the ISP as well as at the three IXPs. This traffic growth,
which would typically occur over a year, took place over a few weeks \--
a substantial increase. At DE-CIX Frankfurt, the world\'s largest
Internet Exchange Point in terms of data throughput, the year 2020 saw
the largest increase in peak traffic within a single year since the IXP
was founded in 1995. Additionally, mobile traffic has slightly receded.
In access networks, the growth rate of upstream traffic also exceeded
the growth in downstream traffic, reflecting increased adoption and use
of videoconferencing and other remote work and school
applications.[¶](#section-3.1.1-1){.pilcrow}

Most traffic increases happened outside of pre-pandemic peak hours.
Before the first COVID-19 lockdowns, the main time of use was in the
evening hours during the week, whereas, since March, it has been spread
more equally across the day. That is, the increase in usage has mainly
occurred outside the previous peak usage times (e.g., during the day
while working from home). This means that, for the first time, network
utilization on weekdays resembled that on weekends. The effects of the
increased traffic volume could easily be absorbed, either by using
existing reserve capacity or by quickly switching additional bandwidth.
This is one reason why the Internet was able to cope well with the
pandemic during the first lockdown
period.[¶](#section-3.1.1-2){.pilcrow}

Some of the lockdowns were lifted or relaxed around May 2020. As people
were allowed to resume some of their daily activities outside of their
home again, as expected, there was a decrease in the traffic observed at
the IXPs and the ISP; instead, mobile traffic began to grow
again.[¶](#section-3.1.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#changes-in-application-use}
::: {#section-3.1.2 .section}
#### [3.1.2.](#section-3.1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Changes in Application Use](#name-changes-in-application-use){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-changes-in-application-use}

The composition of data traffic has changed since the beginning of the
pandemic: the use of videoconferencing services and virtual private
networks (VPNs) for access to company resources from the home
environment has risen sharply. In ISP and IXP networks, it was observed
\[[Feldmann2020](#Feldmann2020){.xref}\] that traffic associated with
web conferencing, video, and gaming increased significantly in March
2020 as a result of the increasing user demand for solutions like Zoom
or Microsoft Teams. For example, the relative traffic share of many
\"essential\" applications like VPN and conferencing tools increased by
more than 200%.[¶](#section-3.1.2-1){.pilcrow}

Also, as people spent more hours at home, they tended to watch videos or
play games, thus increasing entertainment traffic demands. At the same
time, the traffic share for other traffic classes decreased
substantially, e.g., traffic related to education, social media, and,
for some periods, content delivery networks (CDNs). In April and June,
web conferencing traffic was still high compared to the pre-pandemic
scenario, while a slight decrease in CDN and social media traffic was
observed. During these months, many people were still working from home,
but restrictions had been lifted or relaxed, which likely led to an
increase in in-person social activities and a decrease in online social
activities.[¶](#section-3.1.2-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#example-campus-networks}
::: {#section-3.1.2.1 .section}
##### [3.1.2.1.](#section-3.1.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Example Campus Networks](#name-example-campus-networks){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-example-campus-networks}

Changes in traffic have been observed at university campus networks as
well, especially due to the necessary adoption of remote teaching. The
Politecnico di Torino (Italy) deployed its in-house solution for remote
teaching, which caused the outgoing traffic to grow by 2.5 times, driven
by more than 600 daily online classes. Incoming traffic instead
decreased by a factor of 10 due to the cessation of any in-person
activity. Based on their measurements, this change in traffic and
network usage did not, however, lead to noticeable performance
impairments, nor has significantly poor performance been observed in
students in remote regions of Italy. Outgoing traffic also increased due
to other remote working solutions, such as collaboration platforms,
VPNs, and remote desktops.[¶](#section-3.1.2.1-1){.pilcrow}

Similar changes were observed by measuring REDIMadrid
\[[Feldmann2020](#Feldmann2020){.xref}\], a European educational and
research network that connects 16 independent universities and research
centers in the metropolitan region of Madrid. A drop of up to 55% in
traffic volume on working days during the pandemic was observed. Similar
to findings for ISP/IXP networks, it was observed that working days and
weekend days are becoming more similar in terms of total traffic. The
hourly traffic patterns reveal a traffic increase between 9 pm and 7 am.
This could be due to users working more frequently at unusual times but
could also potentially be caused by overseas students (mainly from Latin
America and East Asia as suggested by the Autonomous System (AS) numbers
from which these connections came) who accessed university network
resources from their home countries.[¶](#section-3.1.2.1-2){.pilcrow}

Given the fact that the users of the academic network (e.g., students
and research staff) had to leave campus as a response to lockdown
measures, the traffic in-and-out (i.e., ingress and egress) ratio also
changed drastically. Prior to the lockdown, the incoming traffic volume
was much larger than the outgoing traffic volume. This changed to a more
balanced ratio. This change of traffic asymmetry can be explained by the
nature of remote work. On the one hand, users connected to the network
services mainly to access resources, hence the increase in outgoing
traffic. On the other hand, all external (i.e., Internet-based)
resources requested during work were no longer accessed from the
educational network but from the users\'
homes.[¶](#section-3.1.2.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#mobile-networks-and-mobility}
::: {#section-3.1.3 .section}
#### [3.1.3.](#section-3.1.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Mobile Networks and Mobility](#name-mobile-networks-and-mobilit){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-mobile-networks-and-mobilit}

Mobile network data usage appeared to decline following the imposition
of localized lockdown measures as these reduced typical levels of
mobility and roaming.[¶](#section-3.1.3-1){.pilcrow}

\[[Lutu2020](#Lutu2020){.xref}\] measured the cellular network of O2 UK
to evaluate how the changes in people\'s mobility impacted traffic
patterns. By analyzing cellular network signaling information regarding
users\' device mobility activity, they observed a decrease of 50% in
mobility (according to different mobility metrics) in the UK during the
lockdown period. As they found no correlation between this reduction in
mobility and the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases, only the enforced
government order was effective in significantly reducing mobility, and
this reduction was more significant in densely populated urban areas
than in rural areas. For London specifically, it could be observed from
the mobile network data that approximately 10% of residents temporarily
relocated during the lockdown.[¶](#section-3.1.3-2){.pilcrow}

These mobility changes had immediate implications in the traffic
patterns of the cellular network. The downlink data traffic volume
aggregated for all bearers (including conversational voice) decreased
for the entire UK by up to 25% during the lockdown period. This
correlates with the reduction in mobility that was observed countrywide,
which likely resulted in people relying more on residential broadband
Internet access to run download-intensive applications such as video
streaming. The observed decrease in the radio cell load, with a
reduction of approximately 15% across the UK after the stay-at-home
order was enacted, further corroborates the drop in cellular
connectivity usage.[¶](#section-3.1.3-3){.pilcrow}

The total uplink data traffic volume, on the other hand, experienced
little change (between -7% and +1.5%) during lockdown. This was mainly
due to the increase of 4G voice traffic (i.e., Voice over LTE (VoLTE))
across the UK that peaked at 150% after the lockdown compared to the
national median value before the pandemic, thus compensating for the
decrease in data traffic in the uplink.[¶](#section-3.1.3-4){.pilcrow}

Finally, it was also observed that mobility changes have a different
impact on network usage in geodemographic area clusters. In densely
populated urban areas, a significantly higher decrease of mobile network
usage (i.e., downlink and uplink traffic volume, radio load, and active
users) was observed compared to rural areas. In the case of London, this
was likely due to the geodemographics of the central districts, which
include many seasonal residents (e.g., tourists) and business and
commercial areas.[¶](#section-3.1.3-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#a-deeper-look-at-interconnections}
::: {#section-3.1.4 .section}
#### [3.1.4.](#section-3.1.4){.section-number .selfRef} [A Deeper Look at Interconnections](#name-a-deeper-look-at-interconne){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-a-deeper-look-at-interconne}

Traffic at points of network interconnection noticeably increased, but
most operators reacted quickly by rapidly adding additional capacity
\[[Feldmann2020](#Feldmann2020){.xref}\]. The amount of increase varied,
with some networks that hosted popular applications such as
videoconferencing experiencing traffic growth of several hundred to
several thousand percent. At the IXP level, it was observed that port
utilization increased. This phenomenon is mostly explained by higher
traffic demand from residential users.[¶](#section-3.1.4-1){.pilcrow}

Measurements of interconnection links at major US ISPs by the Center for
Applied Internet Data Analysis (CAIDA) and the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT) found some evidence of diurnal congestion around the
March 2020 time frame \[[Clark2020](#Clark2020){.xref}\], but most of
this congestion disappeared in a few weeks, which suggests that
operators indeed took steps to add capacity or otherwise mitigate the
congestion.[¶](#section-3.1.4-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#cloud-platforms}
::: {#section-3.1.5 .section}
#### [3.1.5.](#section-3.1.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Cloud Platforms](#name-cloud-platforms){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-cloud-platforms}

Cloud infrastructure played a key role in supporting bandwidth-intensive
videoconferencing and remote learning tools to practice social
distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic. Network congestion between
cloud platforms and access networks could impact the quality of
experience of these cloud-based applications. CAIDA leveraged web-based
speed test servers to take download and upload throughput measurements
from virtual machines in public cloud platforms to various access ISPs
in the United States
\[[Mok2020](#Mok2020){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.1.5-1){.pilcrow}

The key findings included the following:[¶](#section-3.1.5-2){.pilcrow}

-   [Persistent congestion events were not widely observed between cloud
    platforms and these networks, particular for large-scale ISPs, but
    we could observe large diurnal download throughput variations in
    peak hours from some locations to the
    cloud.[¶](#section-3.1.5-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.5-3.1}
-   [There was evidence of persistent congestion in the egress direction
    to regional ISPs serving suburban areas in the US. Their users could
    have suffered from poor video streaming or file download performance
    from the
    cloud.[¶](#section-3.1.5-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.5-3.2}
-   [The macroscopic analysis over 3 months (June-August 2020) revealed
    downward trends in download throughput from ISPs and educational
    networks to certain cloud regions. We believe that increased use of
    the cloud in the pandemic could be one of the factors that
    contributed to the decreased
    performance.[¶](#section-3.1.5-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.5-3.3}
:::
:::

::: {#last-mile-congestion}
::: {#section-3.1.6 .section}
#### [3.1.6.](#section-3.1.6){.section-number .selfRef} [Last-Mile Congestion](#name-last-mile-congestion){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-last-mile-congestion}

The last mile is the centerpiece of broadband connectivity, where poor
last-mile performance generally translates to poor quality of
experience. In a recent Internet Measurement Conference (IMC \'20)
research paper, Fontugne et al. investigated last-mile latency using
traceroute data from Reseaux IP Europeens (RIPE) Atlas probes located in
646 ASes and looked for recurrent performance degradation
\[[Fontugne2020-1](#Fontugne2020-1){.xref}\]. They found that, in normal
times, Atlas probes experience persistent last-mile congestion in only
10% of ASes, but they recorded 55% more congested ASes during the
COVID-19 outbreak. This deterioration caused by stay-at-home measures is
particularly marked in networks with a very large number of users and in
certain parts of the world. They found Japan to be the most impacted
country in their study, looking specifically at the Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone (NTT) Corporation Open Computer Network (OCN) but noting
similar observations for several Japanese networks, including Internet
Initiative Japan (IIJ) (AS2497).[¶](#section-3.1.6-1){.pilcrow}

From mid-2020 onward, however, they observed better performance than
before the pandemic. In Japan, this was partly due to the deployments
originally planned for accommodating the Tokyo Olympics, and, more
generally, it reflects the efforts of network operators to cope with
these exceptional circumstances. The pandemic has demonstrated that its
adaptive design and proficient community can keep the Internet
operational during such unprecedented events. Also, from the numerous
research and operational reports recently published, the pandemic is
apparently shaping a more resilient Internet; as Nietzsche wrote, \"What
does not kill me makes me stronger\".[¶](#section-3.1.6-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#user-behaviour}
::: {#section-3.1.7 .section}
#### [3.1.7.](#section-3.1.7){.section-number .selfRef} [User Behavior](#name-user-behavior){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-user-behavior}

The type of traffic needed by the users also changed in 2020. Upstream
traffic increased due the use of videoconferences, remote schooling, and
similar applications. The National Cable & Telecommunications
Association (NCTA) and Comcast reported that while downstream traffic
grew 20%, upstream traffic grew by as much as 30-37%
\[[NCTA2020](#NCTA2020){.xref}\] \[[Comcast2020](#Comcast2020){.xref}\].
Vodafone reported that upstream traffic grew by 100% in some markets
\[[Vodafone2020](#Vodafone2020){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.1.7-1){.pilcrow}

Ericsson\'s ConsumerLab surveyed users regarding their usage and
experiences during the crisis. Some of the key findings in
\[[ConsumerlabReport2020](#ConsumerlabReport2020){.xref}\] were as
follows:[¶](#section-3.1.7-2){.pilcrow}

-   [9 in 10 users increased Internet activities, and time spent
    connected increased. In addition, 1 in 5 started new online
    activities; many in the older generation felt that they were helped
    by video calling; parents felt that their children\'s education was
    helped; and so
    on.[¶](#section-3.1.7-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.7-3.1}
-   [Network performance was, in general, found satisfactory. 6 in 10
    were very satisfied with fixed broadband, and 3 in 4 felt that
    mobile broadband was the same or better compared to before the
    crisis. Consumers valued resilience and quality of service as the
    most important responsibility for network
    operators.[¶](#section-3.1.7-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.7-3.2}
-   [Smartphone application usage changed, with the fastest growth in
    apps related to COVID-19 tracking and information, remote working,
    e-learning, wellness, education, remote health consultation, and
    social shared experience applications. The biggest decreases were in
    travel and booking, ride hailing, location, and parking
    applications.[¶](#section-3.1.7-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.7-3.3}

Some of the behaviors are likely permanent changes
\[[ConsumerlabReport2020](#ConsumerlabReport2020){.xref}\]. The adoption
of video calls and other new services by many consumers, such as the
older generation, is likely going to have a long-lasting effect. Surveys
in various organizations point to a likely long-term increase in the
number of people interested in remote work
\[[WorkplaceAnalytics2020](#WorkplaceAnalytics2020){.xref}\]
\[[McKinsey2020](#McKinsey2020){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.1.7-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#operational}
::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Operational Practices and Architectural Considerations](#name-operational-practices-and-a){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-operational-practices-and-a}

The second and third days of the workshop focused on open discussions of
arising operational and architectural issues and the conclusions that
could be reached from previous discussions and other issues raised in
the position papers.[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#digital-divide}
::: {#section-3.2.1 .section}
#### [3.2.1.](#section-3.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Digital Divide](#name-digital-divide){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-digital-divide}

Measurements from Fastly confirmed that Internet traffic volume in
multiple countries rose rapidly while COVID cases were increasing and
lockdown policies were coming into effect. Download speeds also
decreased but in a much less dramatic fashion than when overall
bandwidth usage increased. School closures led to a dramatic increase in
traffic volume in many regions, and other public policy announcements
triggered large traffic shifts. This suggests that governments should
coordinate with operators to allow time for preemptive operational
changes in some cases.[¶](#section-3.2.1-1){.pilcrow}

Measurements from the US showed that download rates correlate with
income levels. However, download rates in the lowest income zip codes
increased as the pandemic progressed, closing the divide with higher
income areas. One possible reason for this in the data is decisions by
some ISPs, such as Comcast and Cox, that increased speeds for users on
certain lower-cost plans and in certain areas. This suggests that
network capacity was available and that the correlation between income
and download rates was not necessarily due to differences in the
deployed infrastructure in different regions, although it was noted that
certain access link technologies provide more flexibility than others in
this regard.[¶](#section-3.2.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#applications}
::: {#section-3.2.2 .section}
#### [3.2.2.](#section-3.2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Applications](#name-applications){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-applications}

Web conferencing systems (e.g., Microsoft Teams, Zoom, Webex) saw
incredible growth, with overnight traffic increases of 15-20% in
response to public policy changes, such as lockdowns. This required
significant and rapid changes in infrastructure
provisioning.[¶](#section-3.2.2-1){.pilcrow}

Major video providers (YouTube, etc.) reduced bandwidth by 25% in some
regions. It was suggested that this had a huge impact on the quality of
videoconferencing systems until networks could scale to handle the full
bit rate, but other operators of some other services saw limited
impact.[¶](#section-3.2.2-2){.pilcrow}

Updates to popular games have a significant impact on network load. Some
discussions were reported between ISPs, CDNs, and the gaming industry on
possibly coordinating various high-bandwidth update events, similar to
what was done for entertainment/video download speeds. There was an
apparently difficult interplay between bulk download and interactive
real-time applications, potentially due to buffer bloat and queuing
delays.[¶](#section-3.2.2-3){.pilcrow}

It was noted that operators have experience with rapid growth of
Internet traffic. New applications with exponential growth are not that
unusual in the network, and the traffic spike due to the lockdown was
not that unprecedented for many. Many operators have tools and
mechanisms to deal with this. Ensuring that knowledge is shared is a
challenge.[¶](#section-3.2.2-4){.pilcrow}

Following these observations, traffic prioritization was discussed,
starting from Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) marking. The
question arose as to whether a minimal priority-marking scheme would
have helped during the pandemic, e.g., by allowing marking of
less-than-best-effort traffic. That discussion quickly devolved into a
more general QoS and observability discussion and, as such, also touched
on the effects of increased encryption. The group was not,
unsurprisingly, able to resolve the different perspectives and interests
involved, but the discussion demonstrated that progress was
made.[¶](#section-3.2.2-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#observability}
::: {#section-3.2.3 .section}
#### [3.2.3.](#section-3.2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Observability](#name-observability){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-observability}

It is clear that there is a contrast in experience. Many operators
reported few problems in terms of metrics, such as measured download
bandwidth, while videoconferencing applications experienced significant
usability problems running on those networks. The interaction between
application providers and network providers worked very smoothly to
resolve these issues, supported by strong personal contacts and
relationships. But it seems clear that the metrics used by many
operators to understand their network performance don\'t fully capture
the impact on certain applications, and there is an observability gap.
Do we need more tools to figure out the various impacts on user
experience?[¶](#section-3.2.3-1){.pilcrow}

These types of applications use surprising amounts of Forward Error
Correction (FEC). Applications hide lots of loss to ensure a good user
experience. This makes it harder to observe problems. The network can be
behaving poorly, but the experience can be good enough. Resiliency
measures can improve the user experience but hide severe problems. There
may be a missing feedback loop between application developers and
operators.[¶](#section-3.2.3-2){.pilcrow}

It\'s clear that it\'s difficult for application providers and operators
to isolate problems. Is a problem due to the local Wi-Fi, the access
network, the cloud network, etc.? Metrics from access points would help,
but in general, lack of observability into the network as a whole is a
real concern when it comes to debugging performance
issues.[¶](#section-3.2.3-3){.pilcrow}

Further, it\'s clear that it can be difficult to route problem reports
to the person who can fix them, especially if the reported information
needs to be shared across multiple networks in the Internet.
COVID-enhanced cooperation made it easier to debug problems; lines of
communication are important.[¶](#section-3.2.3-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#security}
::: {#section-3.2.4 .section}
#### [3.2.4.](#section-3.2.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Security](#name-security){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security}

The increased threats and network security impacts arising from COVID-19
fall into two areas: (1) the agility of malicious actors to spin up new
campaigns using COVID-19 as a lure, and (2) the increased threat surface
from a rapid shift towards working from
home.[¶](#section-3.2.4-1){.pilcrow}

During 2020, there was a shift to home working generally, and in the way
in which people used the network. IT departments rolled out new
equipment quickly and used technologies like VPNs for the first time,
while others put existing solutions under much greater load. As VPN
technology became more widespread and more widely used, it arguably
became a more valuable target; one Advanced Persistent Threat group
(APT29) was successful in using recently published exploits in a range
of VPN software to gain initial footholds
\[[Kirsty2020](#Kirsty2020){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3.2.4-2){.pilcrow}

Of all scams detected by the United Kingdom National Cyber Security
Centre (UK NCSC) that purported to originate from the UK Government,
more related to COVID-19 than any other subject. There are other reports
of a strong rise in phishing, fraud, and scams related to COVID
\[[Kirsty2020](#Kirsty2020){.xref}\]. Although the overall levels of
cybercrime have not increased from the data seen to date, there was
certainly a shift in activity as both the NCSC and the Department of
Homeland Security Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (DHS
CISA) saw growing use of COVID-19-related themes by malicious cyber
actors as a lure. Attackers used COVID-19-related scams and phishing
emails to target individuals, small and medium businesses, large
organizations, and organizations involved in both national and
international COVID-19 responses (healthcare bodies, pharmaceutical
companies, academia, and medical research organizations). New targets
(for example, organizations involved in COVID-19 vaccine development)
were attacked using VPN exploits, highlighting the potential
consequences of vulnerable
infrastructure.[¶](#section-3.2.4-3){.pilcrow}

It\'s unclear how to effectively detect and counter these attacks at
scale. Approaches such as using Indicators of Compromise and
crowdsourced flagging of suspicious emails were found to be effective in
response to COVID-19-related scams \[[Kirsty2020](#Kirsty2020){.xref}\],
and observing the DNS to detect malicious use is widespread and
effective. The use of DNS over HTTPS offers privacy benefits, but
current deployment models can bypass these existing protective DNS
measures.[¶](#section-3.2.4-4){.pilcrow}

It was also noted that when everyone moves to performing their job
online, lack of understanding of security becomes a bigger issue. Is it
reasonable to expect every user of the Internet to have password
training? Or is there a fundamental problem with a technical solution?
Modern advice advocates a layered approach to security defenses, with
user education forming just one of those
layers.[¶](#section-3.2.4-5){.pilcrow}

Communication platforms such as Zoom are not new: many people have used
them for years, but as COVID-19 saw an increasing number of
organizations and individuals turning to these technologies, they became
an attractive target due to increased usage. In turn, there was an
increase in malicious cyber actor activity, either through hijacking
online meetings that were not secured with passwords or leveraging
unpatched software as an attack vector. How can new or existing measures
protect users from the attacks levied against the next vulnerable
service?[¶](#section-3.2.4-6){.pilcrow}

Overall, it may be that there were fewer security challenges than
expected arising from many people suddenly working from home. However,
the agility of attackers, the importance of robust and scalable defense
mechanisms, and some existing security problems and challenges may have
become even more obvious and acute with an increased use of
Internet-based services, particularly in a pandemic situation and in
times of uncertainty, where users can be more vulnerable to social
engineering techniques and attacks.[¶](#section-3.2.4-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#discussion}
::: {#section-3.2.5 .section}
#### [3.2.5.](#section-3.2.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Discussion](#name-discussion){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-discussion}

There is a concern that we\'re missing observability for the network as
a whole. Each application provider and operator has their own little
lens. No one has the big-picture view of the
network.[¶](#section-3.2.5-1){.pilcrow}

How much of a safety margin do we need? Some of the resiliency comes
from us not running the network too close to its limit. This allows
traffic to shift and gives headroom for the network to cope. The
best-effort nature of the network may help here. Using techniques to run
the network closer to its limits usually improves performance, but
highly optimized networks may be less
robust.[¶](#section-3.2.5-2){.pilcrow}

Finally, it was observed that we get what we measure. There may be an
argument for operators to perhaps shift their measurement focus away
from pure capacity to instead measure Quality of Experience (QoE) or
resilience. The Internet is a critical infrastructure, and people are
realizing that now. We should use this as a wake-up call to improve
resilience, both in protocol design and operational practice, not
necessarily to optimize for absolute performance or quality of
experience.[¶](#section-3.2.5-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#conclusions}
::: {#section-3.3 .section}
### [3.3.](#section-3.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Conclusions](#name-conclusions){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-conclusions}

There is a wealth of data about the performance of the Internet during
the COVID-19 crisis. The main conclusion from the various measurements
is that fairly large shifts occurred. And those shifts were not merely
about exchanging one application for another; they actually impacted
traffic flows and directions and caused, in many cases, a significant
traffic increase. Early reports also seem to indicate that the shifts
have gone relatively smoothly from the point of view of overall consumer
experience.[¶](#section-3.3-1){.pilcrow}

An important but not so visible factor that led to running smoothly was
that many people and organizations were highly motivated to ensure good
user experience. A lot of collaboration happened in the background,
problems were corrected, many providers significantly increased their
capacity, and so on.[¶](#section-3.3-2){.pilcrow}

On the security front, the COVID-19 crisis showcased the agility with
which malicious actors can move in response to a shift in user Internet
usage and the vast potential of the disruption and damage that they can
inflict. Equally, it showed the agility of defenders when they have
access to the tools and information they need to protect users and
networks, and it showcased the power of Indicators of Compromise when
defenders around the world are working together against the same
problem.[¶](#section-3.3-3){.pilcrow}

In general, the Internet also seems well suited for adapting to new
situations, at least within some bounds. The Internet is designed for
flexibility and extensibility, rather than being optimized for today\'s
particular traffic types. This makes it possible to use it for many
applications and in many deployment situations and to make changes as
needed. The generality is present in many parts of the overall system,
from basic Internet technology to browsers and from name servers to
content delivery networks and cloud platforms. When usage changes, what
is needed is often merely different services, perhaps some reallocation
of resources as well as consequent application and continuation of
existing security defenses, but not fundamental technology or hardware
changes.[¶](#section-3.3-4){.pilcrow}

On the other hand, this is not to say that no improvements are
needed:[¶](#section-3.3-5){.pilcrow}

-   [We need a better understanding of the health of the Internet. Going
    forward, the critical nature that the Internet plays in our lives
    means that the health of the Internet needs to receive significant
    attention. Understanding how well networks work is not just a
    technical matter; it is also of crucial importance to the people and
    economies of the societies using it. Projects and research that
    monitor Internet and services performance on a broad scale and
    across different networks are therefore
    important.[¶](#section-3.3-6.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.3-6.1}
-   [We need to maintain defensive mechanisms to be used in times of
    crisis. Malicious cyber actors are continually adjusting their
    tactics to take advantage of new situations, and the COVID-19
    pandemic is no exception. Malicious actors used the strong appetite
    for COVID-19-related information as an opportunity to deliver
    malware and ransomware and to steal user credentials. Against the
    landscape of a shift to working from home and an increase in users
    vulnerable to attack, and as IT departments were often overwhelmed
    by rolling out new infrastructure and devices, sharing Indicators of
    Compromise (IoC) was a vital part of the response to
    COVID-19-related scams and
    attacks.[¶](#section-3.3-6.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.3-6.2}
-   [We need to ensure that broadband is available to all and that
    Internet services equally serve different groups. The pandemic has
    shown how the effects of the digital divide can be amplified during
    a crisis and has further highlighted the importance of equitable
    Internet access.[¶](#section-3.3-6.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.3-6.3}
-   [We need to continue to work on all the other improvements that are
    seen as necessary anyway, such as further improvements in security,
    the ability for networks and applications to collaborate better,
    etc.[¶](#section-3.3-6.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.3-6.4}
-   [We need to ensure that informal collaboration between different
    parties involved in the operation of the network continues and is
    strengthened to ensure continued operational
    resilience.[¶](#section-3.3-6.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.3-6.5}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#feedback-on-meeting-format}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Feedback on Meeting Format](#name-feedback-on-meeting-format){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-feedback-on-meeting-format}

While there are frequently virtual participants in IAB workshops, the
IAB had no experience running workshops entirely
virtually.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

Feedback on this event format was largely positive, however. It was
particularly useful that as the three sessions were scheduled on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday, the time in between the sessions could be used
for mailing list discussion and compilation of additional workshop
material. The positive feedback was likely at least partly due to the
fact that many of the workshop participants knew one another from
previous face-to-face events (primarily IETF
meetings).[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}

The process for sending invitations to the workshop should be improved
for next time, however, as a few invitations were initially lost. In a
virtual meeting, it may be more reasonable to invite not just one person
but all coauthors of a paper, for instance. At least for this workshop,
we did not appear to suffer from having too many participants, and in
many cases, there may be some days when a particular participant may not
be able to attend a session.[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#positionpapers}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Position Papers](#name-position-papers){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-position-papers}

The following position papers were received, in alphabetical
order:[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Afanasyev, A., Wang, L., Yeh, E., Zhang, B., and Zhang, L.:
    Identifying the Disease from the Symptoms: Lessons for Networking in
    the COVID-19 Era
    \[[Afxanasyev2020](#Afxanasyev2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.1}
-   [Arkko, J.: Observations on Network User Behaviour During COVID-19
    \[[Arkko2020](#Arkko2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.2}
-   [Bronzino, F., Culley, E., Feamster, N., Liu, S., Livingood, J., and
    Schmitt, P.: IAB COVID-19 Workshop: Interconnection Changes in the
    United States
    \[[Bronzino2020](#I-D.feamster-livingood-iab-covid19-workshop){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.3}
-   [Campling, A. and Lazanski, D.: Will the Internet Still Be Resilient
    During the Next Black Swan Event?
    \[[Campling2020](#Campling2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.4}
-   [Cho, K.: On the COVID-19 Impact to broadband traffic in Japan
    \[[Cho2020](#Cho2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.5}
-   [Clark, D.: Measurement of congestion on ISP interconnection links
    \[[Clark2020](#Clark2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.6}
-   [Favale, T., Soro, F., Trevisan, M., Drago, I., and Mellia, M.:
    Campus traffic and e-Learning during COVID-19 pandemic
    \[[Favale2020](#Favale2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.7}
-   [Feldmann, A., Gasser, O., Lichtblau, F., Pujol, E., Poese, I.,
    Dietzel, C., Wagner, D., Wichtlhuber, M., Tapiador, J.,
    Vallina-Rodriguez, N., Hohlfeld, O., and Smaragdakis, G.: A view of
    Internet Traffic Shifts at ISP and IXPs during the COVID-19 Pandemic
    \[[Feldmann2020](#Feldmann2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.8){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.8}
-   [Fontugne, R., Shah, A., and Cho, K.: The Impact of COVID-19 on
    Last-mile Latency
    \[[Fontugne2020](#Fontugne2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.9){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.9}
-   [Gillmor, D.: Vaccines, Privacy, Software Updates, and Trust
    \[[Gillmor2020](#Gillmor2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.10){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.10}
-   [Gu, Y. and Li, Z.: Covid 19 Impact on China ISP\'s Network Traffic
    Pattern and Solution Discussion
    \[[Gu2020](#Gu2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.11){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.11}
-   [Jennings, C. and Kozanian, P.: WebEx Scaling During Covid
    \[[Jennings2020](#Jennings2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.12){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.12}
-   [Lutu, A., Perino, D., Bagnulo, M., Frias-Martinez, E., and
    Khangosstar, J.: A Characterization of the COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
    on a Mobile Network Operator Traffic
    \[[Lutu2020](#Lutu2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.13){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.13}
-   [Mok, R., and claffy, kc: Measuring the impact of COVID-19 on cloud
    network performance
    \[[Mok2020](#Mok2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.14){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.14}
-   [Paine, K.: IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts
    \[[Kirsty2020](#Kirsty2020){.xref}\][¶](#section-5-2.15){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.15}
:::
:::

::: {#program-committee}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Program Committee](#name-program-committee){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-program-committee}

The workshop program committee members were [Jari Arkko]{.contact-name},
[Stephen Farrell]{.contact-name}, [Cullen Jennings]{.contact-name},
[Colin Perkins]{.contact-name}, [Ben Campbell]{.contact-name}, and
[Mirja Kühlewind]{.contact-name}.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[Afxanasyev2020\]
:   [Afanasyev, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Wang, L.]{.refAuthor},
    [Yeh, E.]{.refAuthor}, [Zhang, B.]{.refAuthor}, and [L.
    Zhang]{.refAuthor}, [\"Identifying the Disease from the Symptoms:
    Lessons for Networking in the COVID-19 Era\"]{.refTitle}, October
    2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/12/IAB-COVID-19-WS_102820.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Arkko2020\]
:   [Arkko, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Observations on Network User Behaviour
    During COVID-19\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-arkko.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Bronzino2020\]
:   [Bronzino, F.]{.refAuthor}, [Culley, E.]{.refAuthor},
    [Feamster, N.]{.refAuthor}, [Liu, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Livingood, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [P. Schmitt]{.refAuthor}, [\"IAB
    COVID-19 Workshop: Interconnection Changes in the United
    States\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-feamster-livingood-iab-covid19-workshop-01]{.seriesInfo}, 28
    October 2020,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-feamster-livingood-iab-covid19-workshop-01>\>.
:   

\[Campling2020\]
:   [Campling, A.]{.refAuthor} and [D. Lazanski]{.refAuthor}, [\"Will
    the Internet Still Be Resilient During the Next Black Swan
    Event?\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-campling.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Cho2020\]
:   [Cho, K.]{.refAuthor}, [\"On the COVID-19 Impact to broadband
    traffic in Japan\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-cho.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Clark2020\]
:   [Clark, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Measurement of congestion on ISP
    interconnection links\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-clark.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Comcast2020\]
:   [Comcast]{.refAuthor}, [\"COVID-19 Network Update\"]{.refTitle}, May
    2020,
    \<<https://corporate.comcast.com/covid-19/network/may-20-2020>\>.
:   

\[ConsumerlabReport2020\]
:   [Ericsson ConsumerLab]{.refAuthor}, [\"Connectivity in a COVID-19
    world: Keeping consumers connected in a global crisis\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.ericsson.com/en/reports-and-papers/consumerlab/reports/keeping-consumers-connected-during-the-covid-19-crisis>\>.
:   

\[Favale2020\]
:   [Favale, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Soro, F.]{.refAuthor},
    [Trevisan, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Drago, I.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Mellia]{.refAuthor}, [\"Campus traffic and e-Learning during
    COVID-19 pandemic\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1016/j.comnet.2020.107290]{.seriesInfo}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-favale.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Feldmann2020\]
:   [Feldmann, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Gasser, O.]{.refAuthor},
    [Lichtblau, F.]{.refAuthor}, [Pujol, E.]{.refAuthor},
    [Poese, I.]{.refAuthor}, [Dietzel, C.]{.refAuthor},
    [Wagner, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Wichtlhuber, M.]{.refAuthor},
    [Tapiador, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Vallina-Rodriguez, N.]{.refAuthor},
    [Hohlfeld, O.]{.refAuthor}, and [G. Smaragdakis]{.refAuthor}, [\"A
    view of Internet Traffic Shifts at ISP and IXPs during the COVID-19
    Pandemic\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-feldmann.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Fontugne2020\]
:   [Fontugne, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Shah, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [K.
    Cho]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Impact of COVID-19 on Last-mile
    Latency\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-fontugne.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Fontugne2020-1\]
:   [Fontugne, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Shah, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [K.
    Cho]{.refAuthor}, [\"Persistent Last-mile Congestion: Not so
    Uncommon\"]{.refTitle}, [Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measurement
    Conference (IMC \'20)]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1145/3419394.3423648]{.seriesInfo}, October 2020,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1145/3419394.3423648>\>.
:   

\[Gillmor2020\]
:   [Gillmor, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Vaccines, Privacy, Software Updates,
    and Trust\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-gillmor.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Gu2020\]
:   [Gu, Y.]{.refAuthor} and [Z. Li]{.refAuthor}, [\"Covid 19 Impact on
    China ISP\'s Network Traffic Pattern and Solution
    Discussion\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-gu.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Jennings2020\]
:   [Jennings, C.]{.refAuthor} and [P. Kozanian]{.refAuthor}, [\"WebEx
    Scaling During Covid\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-jennings.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Kirsty2020\]
:   [Paine, K.]{.refAuthor}, [\"IAB COVID-19 Network
    Impacts\"]{.refTitle}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-kirstyp.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Lutu2020\]
:   [Lutu, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Perino, D.]{.refAuthor},
    [Bagnulo, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Frias-Martinez, E.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.
    Khangosstar]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Characterization of the COVID-19
    Pandemic Impact on a Mobile Network Operator Traffic\"]{.refTitle},
    [DOI 10.1145/3419394.3423655]{.seriesInfo}, October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-lutu.pdf>\>.
:   

\[McKinsey2020\]
:   [Boland, B.]{.refAuthor}, [De Smet, A.]{.refAuthor},
    [Palter, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [A. Sanghvi]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Reimagining the office and work life after
    COVID-19\"]{.refTitle}, June 2020,
    \<<https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/Organization/Our%20Insights/Reimagining%20the%20office%20and%20work%20life%20after%20COVID%2019/Reimagining-the-office-and-work-life-after-COVID-19-final.pdf>\>.
:   

\[Mok2020\]
:   [Mok, R.]{.refAuthor} and [kc. claffy]{.refAuthor}, [\"Measuring the
    impact of COVID-19 on cloud network performance\"]{.refTitle},
    October 2020,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2020/10/covid19-mok.pdf>\>.
:   

\[NCTA2020\]
:   [NCTA]{.refAuthor}, [\"COVID-19: How Cable\'s Internet Networks Are
    Performing: Metrics, Trends & Observations\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.ncta.com/COVIDdashboard>\>.
:   

\[Vodafone2020\]
:   [Vodafone]{.refAuthor}, [\"An update on Vodafone\'s
    networks\"]{.refTitle}, April 2020,
    \<<https://www.vodafone.com/covid19/news/update-on-vodafone-networks>\>.
:   

\[WorkplaceAnalytics2020\]
:   [Lister, K.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Work-at-Home After Covid-19\--Our
    Forecast\"]{.refTitle}, March 2020,
    \<<https://globalworkplaceanalytics.com/work-at-home-after-covid-19-our-forecast>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#participants}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Appendix A.](#appendix-A){.section-number .selfRef} [Workshop Participants](#name-workshop-participants){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-workshop-participants}

The following is an alphabetical list of participants in the
workshop.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.1}
    [Jari Arkko]{.contact-name}
    (Ericsson/IAB)[¶](#appendix-A-2.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.2}
    [Ben Campbell]{.contact-name}
    (Independent/IAB)[¶](#appendix-A-2.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.3}
    [Andrew Campling]{.contact-name} (419
    Consulting)[¶](#appendix-A-2.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.4}
    [Kenjiro Cho]{.contact-name} (IIJ)[¶](#appendix-A-2.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.5}
    [kc claffy]{.contact-name} (CAIDA)[¶](#appendix-A-2.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.6}
    [David Clark]{.contact-name} (MIT
    CSAIL)[¶](#appendix-A-2.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.7}
    [Chris Dietzel]{.contact-name}
    (DE-CIX)[¶](#appendix-A-2.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.8}
    [Idilio Drago]{.contact-name} (University of
    Turin)[¶](#appendix-A-2.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.9}
    [Stephen Farrell]{.contact-name} (Trinity College
    Dublin/IAB)[¶](#appendix-A-2.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.10}
    [Nick Feamster]{.contact-name} (University of
    Chicago)[¶](#appendix-A-2.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.11}
    [Anja Feldmann]{.contact-name} (Max Planck Institute for
    Informatics)[¶](#appendix-A-2.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.12}
    [Romain Fontugne]{.contact-name} (IIJ Research
    Lab)[¶](#appendix-A-2.12.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.13}
    [Oliver Gasser]{.contact-name} (Max Planck Institute for
    Informatics)[¶](#appendix-A-2.13.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.14}
    [Daniel Kahn Gillmor]{.contact-name}
    (ACLU)[¶](#appendix-A-2.14.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.15}
    [Yunan Gu]{.contact-name} (Huawei)[¶](#appendix-A-2.15.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.16}
    [Oliver Hohlfeld]{.contact-name} (Brandenburg University of
    Technology (BTU))[¶](#appendix-A-2.16.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.17}
    [Jana Iyengar]{.contact-name}
    (Fastly)[¶](#appendix-A-2.17.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.18}
    [Cullen Jennings]{.contact-name}
    (Cisco/IAB)[¶](#appendix-A-2.18.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.19}
    [Mirja Kühlewind]{.contact-name}
    (Ericsson/IAB)[¶](#appendix-A-2.19.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.20}
    [Dominique Lazanski]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-A-2.20.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.21}
    [Zhenbin Li]{.contact-name}
    (Huawei/IAB)[¶](#appendix-A-2.21.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.22}
    [Franziska Lichtblau]{.contact-name} (Max Planck Institute for
    Informatics)[¶](#appendix-A-2.22.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.23}
    [Jason Livingood]{.contact-name}
    (Comcast)[¶](#appendix-A-2.23.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.24}
    [Andra Lutu]{.contact-name} (Telefonica
    Research)[¶](#appendix-A-2.24.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.25}
    [Vesna Manojlovic]{.contact-name} (RIPE
    NCC)[¶](#appendix-A-2.25.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.26}
    [Rüdiger Martin]{.contact-name}
    (EC)[¶](#appendix-A-2.26.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.27}
    [Larry Masinter]{.contact-name}
    (Retired)[¶](#appendix-A-2.27.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.28}
    [Matt Matthis]{.contact-name}
    (Google)[¶](#appendix-A-2.28.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.29}
    [Jared Mauch]{.contact-name}
    (Akamai/IAB)[¶](#appendix-A-2.29.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.30}
    [Deep Medhi]{.contact-name} (NSF)[¶](#appendix-A-2.30.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.31}
    [Marco Mellia]{.contact-name} (Politecnico di
    Torino)[¶](#appendix-A-2.31.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.32}
    [Ricky Mok]{.contact-name} (CAIDA)[¶](#appendix-A-2.32.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.33}
    [Karen O\'Donoghue]{.contact-name} (Internet
    Society)[¶](#appendix-A-2.33.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.34}
    [Kirsty Paine]{.contact-name}
    (NCSC)[¶](#appendix-A-2.34.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.35}
    [Diego Perino]{.contact-name} (Telefonica
    Research)[¶](#appendix-A-2.35.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.36}
    [Colin Perkins]{.contact-name} (University of
    Glasgow/IRTF/IAB)[¶](#appendix-A-2.36.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.37}
    [Enric Pujol]{.contact-name}
    (Benocs)[¶](#appendix-A-2.37.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.38}
    [Anant Shah]{.contact-name} (Verizon Media
    Platform)[¶](#appendix-A-2.38.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.39}
    [Francesca Soro]{.contact-name} (Politecnico di
    Torino)[¶](#appendix-A-2.39.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.40}
    [Brian Trammell]{.contact-name}
    (Google)[¶](#appendix-A-2.40.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.41}
    [Martino Trevisan]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-A-2.41.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.42}
    [Georgios Tselentis]{.contact-name} (European
    Commission)[¶](#appendix-A-2.42.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.43}
    [Lan Wang]{.contact-name} (University of
    Memphis)[¶](#appendix-A-2.43.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.44}
    [Rob Wilton]{.contact-name} (Cisco)[¶](#appendix-A-2.44.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.45}
    [Jiankang Yao]{.contact-name}
    (CNNIC)[¶](#appendix-A-2.45.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-A-2.46}
    [Lixia Zhang]{.contact-name} (UCLA)[¶](#appendix-A-2.46.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [IAB Members at the Time of Approval](#name-iab-members-at-the-time-of-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iab-members-at-the-time-of-}

Internet Architecture Board members at the time this document was
approved for publication were:[¶](#appendix-B-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.1}
    [Jari Arkko]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.2}
    [Deborah Brungard]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.3}
    [Ben Campbell]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.4}
    [Lars Eggert]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.5}
    [Wes Hardaker]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.6}
    [Cullen Jennings]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.7}
    [Mirja Kühlewind]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.8}
    [Zhenbin Li]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.9}
    [Jared Mauch]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.10}
    [Tommy Pauly]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.11}
    [David Schinazi]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.11.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.12}
    [Russ White]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.12.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-B-2.13}
    [Jiankang Yao]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-B-2.13.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::

::: {#acknowledgments}
::: {#appendix-C .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

The authors would like to thank the workshop participants, the members
of the IAB, the program committee, the participants in the architecture
discussion list for the interesting discussions, and [Cindy
Morgan]{.contact-name} for the practical
arrangements.[¶](#appendix-C-1){.pilcrow}

Further special thanks to those participants who also contributed to
this report: [Romain Fontugne]{.contact-name} provided text based on his
blog post at \<<https://eng-blog.iij.ad.jp/archives/7722>\>; [Ricky
Mok]{.contact-name} for text on cloud platforms; [Martino
Trevisan]{.contact-name} for text on campus networks; [David
Clark]{.contact-name} on congestion measurements at interconnects;
[Oliver Hohlfeld]{.contact-name} for the text on traffic growth, changes
in traffic shifts, campus networks, and interconnections; [Andra
Lutu]{.contact-name} on mobile networks; and [Kirsty
Paine]{.contact-name} for text on security impacts. Thanks to [Jason
Livingood]{.contact-name} for his review and
additions.[¶](#appendix-C-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-D .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jari Arkko]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <jari.arkko@ericsson.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Stephen Farrell]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Trinity College Dublin]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <stephen.farrell@cs.tcd.ie>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mirja Kühlewind]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <mirja.kuehlewind@ericsson.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Colin Perkins]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[University of Glasgow]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <csp@csperkins.org>
:::
:::
:::
