  RFC 9095      EPP Bundled Names Mapping   July 2021
  ------------- --------------------------- -----------
  Yao, et al.   Informational               \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Independent Submission

RFC:
:   [9095](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9095){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   July 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Yao
    :::

    ::: org
    CNNIC
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    L. Zhou
    :::

    ::: org
    CNNIC
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    H. Li
    :::

    ::: org
    CNNIC
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    N. Kong
    :::

    ::: org
    Consultant
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Xie
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9095 {#rfcnum}

# Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP) Domain Name Mapping Extension for Strict Bundling Registration {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document describes an extension of Extensible Provisioning Protocol
(EPP) domain name mapping for the provisioning and management of strict
bundling registration of domain names. Specified in XML, this mapping
extends the EPP domain name mapping to provide additional features
required for the provisioning of bundled domain names. This is a
nonstandard proprietary extension.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This is a contribution to the RFC Series, independently of any other RFC
stream. The RFC Editor has chosen to publish this document at its
discretion and makes no statement about its value for implementation or
deployment. Documents approved for publication by the RFC Editor are not
candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9095>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Overview](#name-overview){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Requirement for Bundling Registration of
    Names](#name-requirement-for-bundling-re){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Object
    Attributes](#name-object-attributes){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [RDN](#name-rdn){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [BDN](#name-bdn){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [EPP Command
    Mapping](#name-epp-command-mapping){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1}
        [6.1](#section-6.1){.xref}.  [EPP Query
        Commands](#name-epp-query-commands){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1.2.1}
            [6.1.1](#section-6.1.1){.xref}.  [EPP \<check>
            Command](#name-epp-check-command){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1.2.2}
            [6.1.2](#section-6.1.2){.xref}.  [EPP \<info>
            Command](#name-epp-info-command){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1.2.3}
            [6.1.3](#section-6.1.3){.xref}.  [EPP \<transfer> Query
            Command](#name-epp-transfer-query-command){.xref}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2}
        [6.2](#section-6.2){.xref}.  [EPP Transform
        Commands](#name-epp-transform-commands){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2.2.1}
            [6.2.1](#section-6.2.1){.xref}.  [EPP \<create>
            Command](#name-epp-create-command){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2.2.2}
            [6.2.2](#section-6.2.2){.xref}.  [EPP \<delete>
            Command](#name-epp-delete-command){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2.2.3}
            [6.2.3](#section-6.2.3){.xref}.  [EPP \<renew>
            Command](#name-epp-renew-command){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2.2.4}
            [6.2.4](#section-6.2.4){.xref}.  [EPP \<transfer>
            Command](#name-epp-transfer-command){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2.2.5}
            [6.2.5](#section-6.2.5){.xref}.  [EPP \<update>
            Command](#name-epp-update-command){.xref}
            :::
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Formal Syntax](#name-formal-syntax){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Internationalization
    Considerations](#name-internationalization-consid){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1}
        [9.1](#section-9.1){.xref}.  [XML Namespace and XML
        Schema](#name-xml-namespace-and-xml-schem){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1.2.1}
            [9.1.1](#section-9.1.1){.xref}.  [BDN
            Namespace](#name-bdn-namespace){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1.2.2}
            [9.1.2](#section-9.1.2){.xref}.  [BDN XML
            Schema](#name-bdn-xml-schema){.xref}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.2}
        [9.2](#section-9.2){.xref}.  [EPP
        Extension](#name-epp-extension){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [11](#section-11){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.1}
        [11.1](#section-11.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.2}
        [11.2](#section-11.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.13}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

In RFC 4290 \[[RFC4290](#RFC4290){.xref}\], the \"variant(s)\" are
character(s) and/or string(s) that are treated as equivalent to the base
character. In this document, variants are those strings that are treated
as equivalent to each other according to the domain name registration
policy. Bundled domain names are those that share the same Top-Level
Domain (TLD) but whose second-level labels are variants or those that
have identical second-level labels for which certain parameters are
shared in different TLDs. For example, the Public Interest Registry has
requested to implement bundling of second-level domains for .NGO and
.ONG. So we have two kinds of bundled domain names. The first one is in
the form of \"V-label.TLD\", in which the second-level label (V-label)
is a variant sharing the same TLD. The second one is in the form of
\"LABEL.V-tld\", in which the second-level label (LABEL) remains the
same but ends with a different TLD (V-tld) and these different V-tlds
are managed by the same entity.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

Bundled domain names normally share some attributes. Policy-wise
bundling can be implemented in three ways. The first one is strict
bundling, which requires all bundled names to share many of the same
attributes. When creating, updating, or transferring any of the bundled
domain names, all bundled domain names will be created, updated, or
transferred atomically. The second one is partial bundling, which
requires the bundled domain names to be registered by the same
registrant. The third one is relaxed bundling, which has no specific
requirements on the domain registration. This document mainly addresses
the strict bundling name registration.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

For the name variants, different registries have different policies.
Some registries adopt the policy that variant Internationalized Domain
Names (IDNs) should be blocked. But some registries adopt the policy
that variant IDNs that are identified as equivalent are allocated or
delegated to the same registrant. For example, most registries offering
a Chinese Domain Name (CDN) adopt a registration policy whereby a
registrant can apply for an original CDN in any form: Simplified Chinese
(SC) form, Traditional Chinese (TC) form, or other variant forms. The
corresponding variant CDN in SC form and in TC form will also be
delegated to the same registrant. All variant names in the same TLD
share a common set of attributes. This document mainly discusses the
situation in which variant IDNs that are identified as equivalent are
allocated or delegated to the same
registrant.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

The basic Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP) domain name mapping
\[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\] provides the facility for single domain
name registration. It does not specify how to register the strict
bundled names that share many of the
attributes.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

In order to meet the above requirements of strict bundled name
registration, this document describes an extension of the EPP domain
name mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\] for the provisioning and
management of bundled names. This document describes a nonstandard
proprietary extension. This extension is especially useful for
registries performing Chinese Domain Name registration. This method is
also useful for other language domain names that have similar issues
with Chinese Domain Names. This document is specified using Extensible
Markup Language (XML) 1.0 as described in
\[[W3C.REC-xml-20040204](#W3C.REC-xml-20040204){.xref}\] and XML Schema
notation as described in
\[[W3C.REC-xmlschema-1-20041028](#W3C.REC-xmlschema-1-20041028){.xref}\]
and
\[[W3C.REC-xmlschema-2-20041028](#W3C.REC-xmlschema-2-20041028){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

The EPP core protocol specification \[[RFC5730](#RFC5730){.xref}\]
provides a complete description of EPP command and response structures.
A thorough understanding of the base protocol specification is necessary
to understand the extension mapping described in this
document.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}

This document uses many IDN concepts, so a thorough understanding of the
IDNs for Application (IDNA, described in \[[RFC5890](#RFC5890){.xref}\],
\[[RFC5891](#RFC5891){.xref}\], and \[[RFC5892](#RFC5892){.xref}\]) and
the variant approach discussed in \[[RFC4290](#RFC4290){.xref}\] is
assumed.[¶](#section-1-7){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

Variants in this document are those strings that are treated as
equivalent to each other according to the domain name registration
policy for certain TLDs.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

Bundled domain names are bundled together according to the domain name
registration policy. For example, many Chinese Domain Name registries
follow the principle described in RFC 3743
\[[RFC3743](#RFC3743){.xref}\]. Bundled domain names should belong to
the same owner. If bundled domain names are under different TLDs, those
TLDs should be managed by the same entity.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

The terms \"registered domain name\" (RDN) and \"bundled domain name\"
(BDN) are used in this document. RDN represents the valid domain name
that registrants submitted for the initial registration. BDN represents
the bundled domain name produced according to the bundled domain name
registration policy. In current practice, the number of BDNs is usually
kept at one according to the registration policy set by the registry.
Both the RDN and BDN specified in this document will be registered via
EPP. All other domain names related to the RDN will be
blocked.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

The \"uLabel\" attribute in this document is used to express the U-label
of an Internationalized Domain Name as a series of characters where
non-ASCII characters will be represented in the format of \"&#xXXXX;\"
where XXXX is a Unicode point by using the XML escaping mechanism. The
U-label is defined in \[[RFC5890](#RFC5890){.xref}\]. This document
chooses this format of literal HTML ampersand codes, not the expected
Unicode character codes. Unicode characters may not be displayed
correctly in some text file readers, while HTML numeric character
references are easy for HTML processors. The implementation following
this document should use Unicode characters
directly.[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

This document uses the prefix \"b-dn\" for the namespace
\"urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn\" throughout. Implementations cannot
assume that any particular prefix is used and must employ a
namespace-aware XML parser and serializer to interpret and output the
XML documents.[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}

In the examples, \"C:\" represents lines sent by a protocol client, and
\"S:\" represents lines returned by a protocol server. Indentation and
spacing in the examples are provided only to illustrate element
relationships and are not a required feature of this
specification.[¶](#section-2-6){.pilcrow}

XML is case sensitive. Unless stated otherwise, the XML specifications
and examples provided in this document must be interpreted in the
character case presented to develop a conforming
implementation.[¶](#section-2-7){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Overview](#name-overview){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-overview}

Domain registries have usually adopted a registration model whereby
metadata relating to a domain name, such as its expiration date and
sponsoring registrar, are stored as properties of the domain object. The
domain object is then considered an atomic unit of registration on which
operations such as update, renewal, and deletion may be
performed.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

Bundled names brought about the need for multiple domain names to be
registered and managed as a single package. In this model, the registry
typically accepts a domain registration request (i.e., EPP domain
\<create> command) containing the domain name to be registered. This
domain name is referred to as the RDN in this document. As part of the
processing of the registration request, the registry generates a set of
bundled names that are related to the RDN, either programmatically or
with the guidance of registration policies, and places them in the
registration package together with the RDN.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

The bundled names share many properties, such as expiration date and
sponsoring registrar, by sharing the same domain object. So when
registrants update any property of a domain object within a bundle
package, that property will be updated at the same time for all other
domain objects in the bundle package.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Requirement for Bundling Registration of Names](#name-requirement-for-bundling-re){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-requirement-for-bundling-re}

The bundled names, whether they are in the form of \"V-label.TLD\" or
\"LABEL.V-tld\", should share some parameters or attributes associated
with domain names. Typically, bundled names will share the following
parameters or attributes:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Registrar ownership[¶](#section-4-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.1}
-   [Registration and expiry
    dates[¶](#section-4-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.2}
-   [Registrant, admin, billing, and technical
    contacts[¶](#section-4-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.3}
-   [Name server
    association[¶](#section-4-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.4}
-   [Domain status[¶](#section-4-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.5}
-   [Applicable grace periods (add grace period, renew grace period,
    auto-renew grace period, transfer grace period, and redemption grace
    period)
    \[[RFC3915](#RFC3915){.xref}\][¶](#section-4-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.6}

Because the domain names are bundled and share the same parameters or
attributes, the EPP command should do some processing for these
requirements:[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}

-   [When performing a domain \<check> command, either the BDN or RDN
    can be queried with the EPP command and will return the same
    response.[¶](#section-4-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-4.1}
-   [When performing a domain \<info> command, either the BDN or RDN can
    be queried, and the same response will include both BDN and RDN
    information with the same
    attributes.[¶](#section-4-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-4.2}
-   [When performing a domain \<create> command, if the domain name is
    available, both the BDN and RDN will be
    registered.[¶](#section-4-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-4.3}
-   [When performing a domain \<delete> command, either the BDN or RDN
    will be accepted. If the domain name is registered, both the BDN and
    RDN will be deleted.[¶](#section-4-4.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-4.4}
-   [When performing a domain \<renew> command, either the BDN or RDN
    will be accepted. Upon a successful domain renewal, both the BDN and
    RDN will have their expiry date extended by the requested term. Upon
    a successful domain renewal, both the BDN and RDN will conform to
    the same renew grace
    period.[¶](#section-4-4.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-4.5}
-   [When performing a domain \<transfer> command, either the BDN or RDN
    will be accepted. Upon successful completion of a domain transfer
    request, both the BDN and RDN will enter a pendingTransfer status.
    Upon approval of the transfer request, both the BDN and RDN will be
    owned and managed by the same new
    registrant.[¶](#section-4-4.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-4.6}
-   [When performing a domain \<update> command, either the BDN or RDN
    will be accepted. Any modifications to contact associations, name
    server associations, domain status values, and authorization
    information will be applied to both the BDN and
    RDN.[¶](#section-4-4.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-4.7}
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Object Attributes](#name-object-attributes){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-object-attributes}

This extension defines the following additional elements to the EPP
domain name mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\]. All of these
additional elements are returned from the \<domain:info>
command.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [RDN](#name-rdn){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-rdn}

The RDN is an ASCII name or an IDN with the A-label
\[[RFC5890](#RFC5890){.xref}\] form. In this document, its corresponding
element is \<b-dn:rdn>. An optional attribute \"uLabel\" associated with
\<b-dn:rdn> is used to represent the U-label
\[[RFC5890](#RFC5890){.xref}\] form.[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

For example:[¶](#section-5.1-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5.1-3}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
<b-dn:rdn uLabel="&#x5B9E;&#x4F8B;.example"> xn--
   fsq270a.example</b-dn:rdn>
```

[¶](#section-5.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [BDN](#name-bdn){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-bdn}

The BDN is an ASCII name or an IDN with the A-label
\[[RFC5890](#RFC5890){.xref}\] form that is converted from the
corresponding BDN. In this document, its corresponding element is
\<b-dn:bdn>. An optional attribute \"uLabel\" associated with
\<b-dn:bdn> is used to represent the U-label
\[[RFC5890](#RFC5890){.xref}\] form.[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}

For example:[¶](#section-5.2-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5.2-3}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
<b-dn:bdn uLabel="&#x5BE6;&#x4F8B;.example"> xn--
   fsqz41a.example</b-dn:bdn>
```

[¶](#section-5.2-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP Command Mapping](#name-epp-command-mapping){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-command-mapping}

A detailed description of the EPP syntax and semantics can be found in
the EPP core protocol specification \[[RFC5730](#RFC5730){.xref}\]. The
command mappings described here are specifically for use in provisioning
and managing bundled names via EPP.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-6.1 .section}
### [6.1.](#section-6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP Query Commands](#name-epp-query-commands){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-query-commands}

EPP provides three commands to retrieve domain information: \<check> to
determine if a domain object can be provisioned within a repository,
\<info> to retrieve detailed information associated with a domain
object, and \<transfer> to retrieve domain-object transfer status
information.[¶](#section-6.1-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-6.1.1 .section}
#### [6.1.1.](#section-6.1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP \<check> Command](#name-epp-check-command){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-check-command}

This extension does not add any element to the EPP \<check> command or
\<check> response described in the EPP domain name mapping
\[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\]. However, when either the RDN or BDN is
sent for a check, the response should contain both RDN and BDN
information, which may also give some explanation in the reason field to
tell the registrant that the associated domain name is a produced name
according to some bundle domain name
policy.[¶](#section-6.1.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-example-check-response}

::: {#section-6.1.1-2.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
S:<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
S:<epp xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp-1.0">
S:  <response>
S:    <result code="1000">
S:      <msg>Command completed successfully</msg>
S:    </result>
S:    <resData>
S:      <domain:chkData
S:        xmlns:domain="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:domain-1.0">
S:          <domain:cd>
S:           <domain:name avail="1">
S:            xn--fsq270a.example</domain:name>
S:          </domain:cd>
S:          <domain:cd>
S:            <domain:name avail="1">
S:              xn--fsqz41a.example
S:            </domain:name>
S:            <domain:reason>This associated domain name is
S:              a produced name based on bundle name policy.
S:            </domain:reason>
S:          </domain:cd>
S:      </domain:chkData>
S:    </resData>
S:    <trID>
S:      <clTRID>ABC-12345</clTRID>
S:      <svTRID>54322-XYZ</svTRID>
S:    </trID>
S:  </response>
S:</epp>
```
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [Example \<check>
Response](#name-example-check-response){.selfRef}
:::

::: {#section-6.1.2 .section}
#### [6.1.2.](#section-6.1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP \<info> Command](#name-epp-info-command){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-info-command}

This extension does not add any element to the EPP \<info> command
described in the EPP domain mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\].
However, additional elements are defined for the \<info>
response.[¶](#section-6.1.2-1){.pilcrow}

When an \<info> command has been processed successfully, the EPP
\<resData> element must contain child elements as described in the EPP
domain mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\]. In addition, unless some
registration policy has some special processing, the EPP \<extension>
element should contain a child \<b-dn:infData> element that identifies
the extension namespace if the domain object has data associated with
this extension and based on its registration policy. The \<b-dn:infData>
element contains the \<b-dn:bundle>, which has the following child
elements:[¶](#section-6.1.2-2){.pilcrow}

-   [A \<b-dn:rdn> element that contains the RDN, along with the
    attribute described
    below.[¶](#section-6.1.2-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.1.2-3.1}
-   [An optional \<b-dn:bdn> element that contains the BDN, along with
    the attribute described
    below.[¶](#section-6.1.2-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.1.2-3.2}

The above elements contain the following
attribute:[¶](#section-6.1.2-4){.pilcrow}

-   [An optional \"uLabel\" attribute represents the U-label of the
    element.[¶](#section-6.1.2-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.1.2-5.1}

[]{#name-example-info-response-for-a}

::: {#section-6.1.2-6.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
S:<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
S:<epp xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp-1.0">
S:  <response>
S:    <result code="1000">
S:      <msg>Command completed successfully</msg>
S:    </result>
S:    <resData>
S:      <domain:infData
S:        xmlns:domain="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:domain-1.0">
S:        <domain:name>xn--fsq270a.example</domain:name>
S:        <domain:roid>58812678-domain</domain:roid>
S:        <domain:status s="ok"/>
S:        <domain:registrant>123</domain:registrant>
S:        <domain:contact type="admin">123</domain:contact>
S:        <domain:contact type="tech">123</domain:contact>
S:        <domain:ns>
S:          <domain:hostObj>ns1.example.cn
S:          </domain:hostObj>
S:        </domain:ns>
S:        <domain:clID>ClientX</domain:clID>
S:        <domain:crID>ClientY</domain:crID>
S:        <domain:crDate>2019-04-03T22:00:00.0Z
S:        </domain:crDate>
S:        <domain:exDate>2022-04-03T22:00:00.0Z
S:        </domain:exDate>
S:        <domain:authInfo>
S:          <domain:pw>2fooBAR</domain:pw>
S:        </domain:authInfo>
S:      </domain:infData>
S:    </resData>
S:    <extension>
S:      <b-dn:infData
S:        xmlns:b-dn="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn">
S:        <b-dn:bundle>
S:          <b-dn:rdn uLabel="&#x5B9E;&#x4F8B;.example">
S:            xn--fsq270a.example
S:          </b-dn:rdn>
S:          <b-dn:bdn uLabel="&#x5BE6;&#x4F8B;.example">
S:            xn--fsqz41a.example
S:          </b-dn:bdn>
S:        </b-dn:bundle>
S:      </b-dn:infData>
S:    </extension>
S:    <trID>
S:      <clTRID>ABC-12345</clTRID>
S:      <svTRID>54322-XYZ</svTRID>
S:    </trID>
S:  </response>
S:</epp>
```
:::

[Figure 2](#figure-2){.selfRef}: [Example \<info> Response for an
Authorized Client](#name-example-info-response-for-a){.selfRef}

The \<info> response for the unauthorized client has not been changed,
see \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\] for
details.[¶](#section-6.1.2-7){.pilcrow}

An EPP error response must be returned if an \<info> command cannot be
processed for any reason.[¶](#section-6.1.2-8){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-6.1.3 .section}
#### [6.1.3.](#section-6.1.3){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP \<transfer> Query Command](#name-epp-transfer-query-command){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-transfer-query-command}

This extension does not add any element to the EPP \<transfer> command
or \<transfer> response described in the EPP domain mapping
\[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.1.3-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6.2 .section}
### [6.2.](#section-6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP Transform Commands](#name-epp-transform-commands){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-transform-commands}

EPP provides five commands to transform domain objects: \<create> to
create an instance of a domain object, \<delete> to delete an instance
of a domain object, \<renew> to extend the validity period of a domain
object, \<transfer> to manage domain object sponsorship changes, and
\<update> to change information associated with a domain
object.[¶](#section-6.2-1){.pilcrow}

When these commands have been processed successfully, the EPP \<resData>
element must contain child elements as described in the EPP domain
mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\]. Unless some registration policy
has some special processing, this EPP \<extension> element should
contain the \<b-dn:bundle>, which has the following child
elements:[¶](#section-6.2-2){.pilcrow}

-   [A \<b-dn:rdn> element that contains the RDN, along with the
    attribute described
    below.[¶](#section-6.2-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.2-3.1}
-   [An optional \<b-dn:bdn> element that contains the BDN, along with
    the attribute described
    below.[¶](#section-6.2-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.2-3.2}

The above elements contain the following
attribute:[¶](#section-6.2-4){.pilcrow}

-   [An optional \"uLabel\" attribute represents the U-label of the
    element.[¶](#section-6.2-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.2-5.1}

::: {#section-6.2.1 .section}
#### [6.2.1.](#section-6.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP \<create> Command](#name-epp-create-command){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-create-command}

This extension defines additional elements to extend the EPP \<create>
command described in the EPP domain name mapping
\[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\] for bundled names
registration.[¶](#section-6.2.1-1){.pilcrow}

In addition to the EPP command elements described in the EPP domain
mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\], the \<create> command shall
contain an \<extension> element. Unless some registration policy has
some special processing, the \<extension> element should contain a child
\<b-dn:create> element that identifies the bundle namespace and a child
\<b-dn:rdn> element that identifies the U-label form of the registered
domain name with the \"uLabel\" attribute. The U-label is used for easy
reading by the registrants and easy debugging by the registrars and the
registries.[¶](#section-6.2.1-2){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-example-create-command}

::: {#section-6.2.1-3.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
C:<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
C:<epp xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp-1.0">
C:  <command>
C:    <create>
C:      <domain:create
C:        xmlns:domain="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:domain-1.0">
C:        <domain:name>xn--fsq270a.example</domain:name>
C:        <domain:period unit="y">2</domain:period>
C:        <domain:registrant>123</domain:registrant>
C:        <domain:contact type="admin">123</domain:contact>
C:        <domain:contact type="tech">123</domain:contact>
C:        <domain:authInfo>
C:          <domain:pw>2fooBAR</domain:pw>
C:        </domain:authInfo>
C:      </domain:create>
C:    </create>
C:    <extension>
C:      <b-dn:create
C:        xmlns:b-dn="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn">
C:        <b-dn:rdn uLabel="&#x5B9E;&#x4F8B;.example">
C:          xn--fsq270a.example
C:        </b-dn:rdn>
C:      </b-dn:create>
C:    </extension>
C:    <clTRID>ABC-12345</clTRID>
C:  </command>
C:</epp>
```
:::

[Figure 3](#figure-3){.selfRef}: [Example \<create>
Command](#name-example-create-command){.selfRef}

When a \<create> command has been processed successfully, the EPP
\<creData> element must contain child elements as described in the EPP
domain mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\]. In addition, unless some
registration policy has some special processing, the EPP \<extension>
element should contain a child \<b-dn:creData> element that identifies
the extension namespace if the domain object has data associated with
this extension and based on its registration policy. The \<b-dn:creData>
element contains the \<b-dn:bundle>
element.[¶](#section-6.2.1-4){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-example-create-response}

::: {#section-6.2.1-5.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
S:<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
S:<epp xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp-1.0">
S:  <response>
S:    <result code="1000">
S:      <msg>Command completed successfully</msg>
S:    </result>
S:    <resData>
S:      <domain:creData
S:        xmlns:domain="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:domain-1.0">
S:        <domain:name>xn--fsq270a.example</domain:name>
S:        <domain:crDate>2019-04-03T22:00:00.0Z</domain:crDate>
S:        <domain:exDate>2021-04-03T22:00:00.0Z</domain:exDate>
S:      </domain:creData>
S:    </resData>
S:    <extension>
S:      <b-dn:creData
S:        xmlns:b-dn="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn">
S:        <b-dn:bundle>
S:          <b-dn:rdn uLabel="&#x5B9E;&#x4F8B;.example">
S:            xn--fsq270a.example
S:          </b-dn:rdn>
S:          <b-dn:bdn uLabel="&#x5BE6;&#x4F8B;.example" >
S:            xn--fsqz41a.example
S:          </b-dn:bdn>
S:        </b-dn:bundle>
S:      </b-dn:creData>
S:    </extension>
S:    <trID>
S:      <clTRID>ABC-12345</clTRID>
S:      <svTRID>54322-XYZ</svTRID>
S:    </trID>
S:  </response>
S:</epp>
```
:::

[Figure 4](#figure-4){.selfRef}: [Example \<create>
Response](#name-example-create-response){.selfRef}

An EPP error response must be returned if a \<create> command cannot be
processed for any reason.[¶](#section-6.2.1-6){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-6.2.2 .section}
#### [6.2.2.](#section-6.2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP \<delete> Command](#name-epp-delete-command){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-delete-command}

This extension does not add any element to the EPP \<delete> command
described in the EPP domain mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\].
However, additional elements are defined for the \<delete>
response.[¶](#section-6.2.2-1){.pilcrow}

When a \<delete> command has been processed successfully, the EPP
\<delData> element must contain child elements as described in the EPP
domain mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\]. In addition, unless some
registration policy has some special processing, the EPP \<extension>
element should contain a child \<b-dn:delData> element that identifies
the extension namespace if the domain object has data associated with
this extension and based on its registration policy. The \<b-dn:delData>
element should contain the \<b-dn:bundle>
element.[¶](#section-6.2.2-2){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-example-delete-response}

::: {#section-6.2.2-3.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
S:<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
S:<epp xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp-1.0">
S:  <response>
S:    <result code="1000">
S:      <msg>Command completed successfully</msg>
S:    </result>
S:    <extension>
S:      <b-dn:delData
S:        xmlns:b-dn="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn">
S:        <b-dn:bundle>
S:          <b-dn:rdn uLabel="&#x5B9E;&#x4F8B;.example">
S:            xn--fsq270a.example
S:          </b-dn:rdn>
S:          <b-dn:bdn uLabel="&#x5BE6;&#x4F8B;.example">
S:            xn--fsqz41a.example
S:          </b-dn:bdn>
S:        </b-dn:bundle>
S:      </b-dn:delData>
S:    </extension>
S:    <trID>
S:      <clTRID>ABC-12345</clTRID>
S:      <svTRID>54321-XYZ</svTRID>
S:    </trID>
S:  </response>
S:</epp>
```
:::

[Figure 5](#figure-5){.selfRef}: [Example \<delete>
Response](#name-example-delete-response){.selfRef}

An EPP error response must be returned if a \<delete> command cannot be
processed for any reason.[¶](#section-6.2.2-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-6.2.3 .section}
#### [6.2.3.](#section-6.2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP \<renew> Command](#name-epp-renew-command){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-renew-command}

This extension does not add any element to the EPP \<renew> command
described in the EPP domain name mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\].
However, when either the RDN or BDN is sent for renewal, the response
should contain both RDN and BDN information. When the command has been
processed successfully, the EPP \<extension> element shall be contained
in the response if the domain object has data associated with bundled
names. Unless some registration policy has some special processing, this
EPP \<extension> element should contain the \<b-dn:renData>, which
contains the \<b-dn:bundle> element.[¶](#section-6.2.3-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-example-renew-response}

::: {#section-6.2.3-2.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
S:<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
S:<epp xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp-1.0">
S:  <response>
S:    <result code="1000">
S:      <msg>Command completed successfully</msg>
S:    </result>
S:    <resData>
S:      <domain:renData
S:        xmlns:domain="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:domain-1.0">
S:        <domain:name>xn--fsq270a.example</domain:name>
S:        <domain:exDate>2022-04-03T22:00:00.0Z</domain:exDate>
S:      </domain:renData>
S:    </resData>
S:    <extension>
S:      <b-dn:renData
S:        xmlns:b-dn="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn">
S:        <b-dn:bundle>
S:          <b-dn:rdn uLabel="&#x5B9E;&#x4F8B;.example">
S:            xn--fsq270a.example
S:          </b-dn:rdn>
S:          <b-dn:bdn uLabel="&#x5BE6;&#x4F8B;.example" >
S:            xn--fsqz41a.example
S:          </b-dn:bdn>
S:        </b-dn:bundle>
S:      </b-dn:renData>
S:    </extension>
S:    <trID>
S:      <clTRID>ABC-12345</clTRID>
S:      <svTRID>54322-XYZ</svTRID>
S:    </trID>
S:  </response>
S:</epp>
```
:::

[Figure 6](#figure-6){.selfRef}: [Example \<renew>
Response](#name-example-renew-response){.selfRef}
:::

::: {#section-6.2.4 .section}
#### [6.2.4.](#section-6.2.4){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP \<transfer> Command](#name-epp-transfer-command){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-transfer-command}

This extension does not add any element to the EPP \<transfer> command
described in the EPP domain name mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\].
However, additional elements are defined for the \<transfer> response in
the EPP object mapping. When the command has been processed
successfully, the EPP \<extension> element shall be contained in the
response if the domain object has data associated with bundled names.
Unless some registration policy has some special processing, this EPP
\<extension> element should contain the \<b-dn:trnData>, which contains
the \<b-dn:bundle> element.[¶](#section-6.2.4-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-example-transfer-response}

::: {#section-6.2.4-2.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
S:<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
S:<epp xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp-1.0">
S:  <response>
S:    <result code="1001">
S:      <msg>Command completed successfully; action pending</msg>
S:    </result>
S:    <resData>
S:      <domain:trnData
S:        xmlns:domain="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:domain-1.0">
S:        <domain:name>xn--fsq270a.example</domain:name>
S:        <domain:trStatus>pending</domain:trStatus>
S:        <domain:reID>ClientX</domain:reID>
S:        <domain:reDate>2021-04-03T22:00:00.0Z</domain:reDate>
S:        <domain:acID>ClientY</domain:acID>
S:        <domain:acDate>2021-04-08T22:00:00.0Z</domain:acDate>
S:        <domain:exDate>2022-04-03T22:00:00.0Z</domain:exDate>
S:      </domain:trnData>
S:    </resData>
S:    <extension>
S:      <b-dn:trnData
S:        xmlns:b-dn="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn">
S:        <b-dn:bundle>
S:          <b-dn:rdn uLabel="&#x5B9E;&#x4F8B;.example">
S:            xn--fsq270a.example
S:          </b-dn:rdn>
S:          <b-dn:bdn uLabel="&#x5BE6;&#x4F8B;.example">
S:            xn--fsqz41a.example
S:          </b-dn:bdn>
S:        </b-dn:bundle>
S:      </b-dn:trnData>
S:    </extension>
S:    <trID>
S:      <clTRID>ABC-12345</clTRID>
S:      <svTRID>54322-XYZ</svTRID>
S:    </trID>
S:  </response>
S:</epp>
```
:::

[Figure 7](#figure-7){.selfRef}: [Example \<transfer>
Response](#name-example-transfer-response){.selfRef}
:::

::: {#section-6.2.5 .section}
#### [6.2.5.](#section-6.2.5){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP \<update> Command](#name-epp-update-command){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-update-command}

This extension does not add any element to the EPP \<update> command
described in the EPP domain name mapping \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\].
However, additional elements are defined for the \<update> response in
the EPP object mapping. When the command has been processed
successfully, the EPP \<extension> element shall be contained in the
response if the domain object has data associated with bundled names.
Unless some registration policy has some special processing, this EPP
\<extension> element should contain the \<b-dn:upData>, which contains
the \<b-dn:bundle> element.[¶](#section-6.2.5-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-example-update-response}

::: {#section-6.2.5-2.1}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
S:<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
S:<epp xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp-1.0">
S:  <response>
S:    <result code="1000">
S:      <msg>Command completed successfully</msg>
S:    </result>
S:    <extension>
S:      <b-dn:upData
S:        xmlns:b-dn="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn">
S:        <b-dn:bundle>
S:          <b-dn:rdn uLabel="&#x5B9E;&#x4F8B;.example" >
S:            xn--fsq270a.example
S:          </b-dn:rdn>
S:          <b-dn:bdn uLabel="&#x5BE6;&#x4F8B;.example">
S:            xn--fsqz41a.example
S:          </b-dn:bdn>
S:        </b-dn:bundle>
S:      </b-dn:upData>
S:    </extension>
S:    <trID>
S:      <clTRID>ABC-12345</clTRID>
S:      <svTRID>54322-XYZ</svTRID>
S:    </trID>
S:  </response>
S:</epp>
```
:::

[Figure 8](#figure-8){.selfRef}: [Example \<update>
Response](#name-example-update-response){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#formal}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Formal Syntax](#name-formal-syntax){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-formal-syntax}

An EPP object name mapping extension for bundled names is specified in
XML Schema notation. The formal syntax presented here is a complete
schema representation of the object mapping suitable for automated
validation of EPP XML instances. The BEGIN and END tags are not part of
the schema; they are used to note the beginning and ending of the schema
for URI registration purposes.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-7-2}
``` {.sourcecode .lang-xml}
<CODE BEGINS>
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<schema targetNamespace="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn"
  xmlns:b-dn="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn"
  xmlns:eppcom="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:eppcom-1.0"
  xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
  elementFormDefault="qualified">

<!--
  Import common element types.
-->
<import namespace="urn:iana:xml:ns:eppcom-1.0"/>

<annotation>
  <documentation>
    Extensible Provisioning Protocol v1.0
    Bundle Domain Extension Schema v1.0
  </documentation>
</annotation>

<!--
  Child elements found in EPP commands.
-->
<element name="create" type="b-dn:createDataType"/>

<!--
  Child elements of the <b-dn:create> command.
  All elements must be present at time of creation
-->
<complexType name="createDataType">
  <sequence>
    <element name="rdn" type="b-dn:rdnType"
      minOccurs="0"/>
  </sequence>
</complexType>

<!--
  Child response elements in <b-dn:infData>, <b-dn:delData>,
  <b-dn:creData>, <b-dn:renData>, <b-dn:trnData> and <b-dn:upData>.
-->
<element name="infData" type="b-dn:bundleDataType"/>
<element name="delData" type="b-dn:bundleDataType"/>
<element name="creData" type="b-dn:bundleDataType"/>
<element name="renData" type="b-dn:bundleDataType"/>
<element name="trnData" type="b-dn:bundleDataType"/>
<element name="upData" type="b-dn:bundleDataType"/>

<complexType name="bundleDataType">
  <sequence>
    <element name="bundle" type="b-dn:bundleType" />
  </sequence>
</complexType>

<complexType name="bundleType">
  <sequence>
    <element name="rdn" type="b-dn:rdnType" />
    <element name="bdn" type="b-dn:rdnType"
      minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" />
  </sequence>
</complexType>

<complexType name="rdnType">
  <simpleContent>
    <extension base="eppcom:labelType">
      <attribute name="uLabel" type="eppcom:labelType"/>
    </extension>
  </simpleContent>
</complexType>

<!--
  End of schema.
-->
</schema>

<CODE ENDS>
```

[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#Internationalization}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Internationalization Considerations](#name-internationalization-consid){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-internationalization-consid}

EPP is represented in XML, which provides support for encoding
information using the Unicode character set and its more compact
representations, including UTF-8. Conformant XML processors recognize
both UTF-8 and UTF-16. Though XML includes provisions to identify and
use other character encodings through use of an \"encoding\" attribute
in an \<?xml?> declaration, use of UTF-8 is
recommended.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

As an extension of the EPP domain name mapping, the elements and element
content described in this document must inherit the internationalization
conventions used to represent higher-layer domain and core protocol
structures present in an XML instance that includes this
extension.[¶](#section-8-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Iana}
::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

::: {#Iana1}
::: {#section-9.1 .section}
### [9.1.](#section-9.1){.section-number .selfRef} [XML Namespace and XML Schema](#name-xml-namespace-and-xml-schem){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-xml-namespace-and-xml-schem}

This document uses URNs to describe XML namespaces and XML schemas
conforming to a registry mechanism described in
\[[RFC3688](#RFC3688){.xref}\].[¶](#section-9.1-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#Iana11}
::: {#section-9.1.1 .section}
#### [9.1.1.](#section-9.1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [BDN Namespace](#name-bdn-namespace){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-bdn-namespace}

IANA has assigned the following for the BDN namespace in the \"ns\"
subregistry of the \"IETF XML Registry\", with this document as the
reference:[¶](#section-9.1.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

URI:
:   urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:epp:b-dn[¶](#section-9.1.1-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Registrant Contact:
:   See the \"Authors\' Addresses\" section of this
    document.[¶](#section-9.1.1-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

XML:
:   None. The namespace URI does not represent an XML
    specification.[¶](#section-9.1.1-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#Iana12}
::: {#section-9.1.2 .section}
#### [9.1.2.](#section-9.1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [BDN XML Schema](#name-bdn-xml-schema){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-bdn-xml-schema}

IANA has made the following assignment in the \"schema\" subregistry of
the \"IETF XML Registry\" for the BDN XML schema, with this document as
the reference:[¶](#section-9.1.2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

URI:
:   urn:ietf:params:xml:schema:epp:b-dn[¶](#section-9.1.2-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Registrant Contact:
:   See the \"Authors\' Addresses\" section of this
    document.[¶](#section-9.1.2-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

XML:
:   See the \"[Formal Syntax](#formal){.xref}\" section of this
    document.[¶](#section-9.1.2-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#Iana2}
::: {#section-9.2 .section}
### [9.2.](#section-9.2){.section-number .selfRef} [EPP Extension](#name-epp-extension){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-epp-extension}

IANA has registered the EPP extension described in this document in the
\"Extensions for the Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)\" registry
described in \[[RFC7451](#RFC7451){.xref}\]. The details of the
registration are as follows:[¶](#section-9.2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Name of Extension:
:   \"Domain Name Mapping Extension for Strict Bundling
    Registration\"[¶](#section-9.2-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Document Status:
:   Informational[¶](#section-9.2-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Reference:
:   This document[¶](#section-9.2-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Registrant Name and Email Address:
:   See the \"Authors\' Addresses\" section of this
    document.[¶](#section-9.2-2.8){.pilcrow}
:   

TLDs:
:   Any[¶](#section-9.2-2.10){.pilcrow}
:   

IPR Disclosure:
:   <https://datatracker.ietf.org/ipr/2479>[¶](#section-9.2-2.12){.pilcrow}
:   

Status:
:   Active[¶](#section-9.2-2.14){.pilcrow}
:   

Notes:
:   None[¶](#section-9.2-2.16){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#security}
::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

Normally, the EPP server will only be connected by the authorized EPP
client, which knows whether the EPP server supports the extension
described in this document via out-of-band service. The EPP client
should avoid sending this extension to the unimplemented EPP server. In
case a client that supports this document sends a request to a server
that does not support this document, the server will return the result
code 2103 according to [Section
3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5730#section-3){.relref} of
\[[RFC5730](#RFC5730){.xref}\]. [Section
3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5730#section-3){.relref} of
\[[RFC5730](#RFC5730){.xref}\] has the following information for result
code 2103.[¶](#section-10-1){.pilcrow}

> 2103 \"Unimplemented extension\"[¶](#section-10-2.1){.pilcrow}
>
> This response code [MUST]{.bcp14} be returned when a server receives a
> valid EPP command element that contains a protocol command extension
> that is not implemented by the server.[¶](#section-10-2.2){.pilcrow}

Some registries and registrars have more than 15 years\' experience with
the bundled registration of domain names (especially Chinese Domain
Names). They have not found any significant security issues. One
principle that the registry and registrar should let the registrants
know is that bundled registered domain names will be created,
transferred, updated, and deleted together as a group. The registrants
for bundled domain names should remember this principle when performing
operations to these domain names. \[[RFC5730](#RFC5730){.xref}\] also
introduces some security consideration.[¶](#section-10-3){.pilcrow}

This document does not take a position regarding whether or not the
bundled domain names share a key for Delegation Signer (DS) and/or DNS
Public Key (DNSKEY) resource records. The DNS administrator can choose
whether DS/DNSKEY information can be shared or not. If a DS/DNSKEY key
is shared, then the bundled domain names share fate if there is a key
compromise.[¶](#section-10-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-11 .section}
## [11.](#section-11){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-11.1 .section}
### [11.1.](#section-11.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC3688\]
:   [Mealling, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The IETF XML Registry\"]{.refTitle},
    [BCP 81]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 3688]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3688]{.seriesInfo}, January 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3688>\>.
:   

\[RFC5730\]
:   [Hollenbeck, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Extensible Provisioning Protocol
    (EPP)\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 69]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 5730]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC5730]{.seriesInfo}, August 2009,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5730>\>.
:   

\[RFC5731\]
:   [Hollenbeck, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Extensible Provisioning Protocol
    (EPP) Domain Name Mapping\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 69]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    5731]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5731]{.seriesInfo}, August
    2009, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5731>\>.
:   

\[RFC5890\]
:   [Klensin, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internationalized Domain Names for
    Applications (IDNA): Definitions and Document
    Framework\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5890]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5890]{.seriesInfo}, August 2010,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5890>\>.
:   

\[RFC5891\]
:   [Klensin, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internationalized Domain Names in
    Applications (IDNA): Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5891]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5891]{.seriesInfo}, August
    2010, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5891>\>.
:   

\[RFC5892\]
:   [Faltstrom, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Unicode Code Points and
    Internationalized Domain Names for Applications
    (IDNA)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5892]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5892]{.seriesInfo}, August 2010,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5892>\>.
:   

\[RFC7451\]
:   [Hollenbeck, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Extension Registry for the
    Extensible Provisioning Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7451]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7451]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2015, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7451>\>.
:   

\[W3C.REC-xml-20040204\]
:   [Bray, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Paoli, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Sperberg-McQueen,
    C.M.]{.refAuthor}, [Maler, E.]{.refAuthor}, and [F.
    Yergeau]{.refAuthor}, [\"Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Third
    Edition)\"]{.refTitle}, [W3C Recommendation
    REC-xml-20040204]{.refContent}, February 2004,
    \<[http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xml-20040204](https://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xml-20040204)\>.
:   

\[W3C.REC-xmlschema-1-20041028\]
:   [Thompson, H.]{.refAuthor}, [Beech, D.]{.refAuthor},
    [Maloney, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [N. Mendelsohn]{.refAuthor}, [\"XML
    Schema Part 1: Structures Second Edition\"]{.refTitle}, [W3C
    Recommendation REC-xmlschema-1-20041028]{.refContent}, October 2004,
    \<[http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xmlschema-1-20041028](https://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xmlschema-1-20041028)\>.
:   

\[W3C.REC-xmlschema-2-20041028\]
:   [Biron, P.]{.refAuthor} and [A. Malhotra]{.refAuthor}, [\"XML Schema
    Part 2: Datatypes Second Edition\"]{.refTitle}, [W3C Recommendation
    REC-xmlschema-2-20041028]{.refContent}, October 2004,
    \<[http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xmlschema-2-20041028](https://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xmlschema-2-20041028)\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-11.2 .section}
### [11.2.](#section-11.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC3743\]
:   [Konishi, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Huang, K.]{.refAuthor},
    [Qian, H.]{.refAuthor}, and [Y. Ko]{.refAuthor}, [\"Joint
    Engineering Team (JET) Guidelines for Internationalized Domain Names
    (IDN) Registration and Administration for Chinese, Japanese, and
    Korean\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3743]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3743]{.seriesInfo}, April 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3743>\>.
:   

\[RFC3915\]
:   [Hollenbeck, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Domain Registry Grace Period
    Mapping for the Extensible Provisioning Protocol
    (EPP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3915]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3915]{.seriesInfo}, September 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3915>\>.
:   

\[RFC4290\]
:   [Klensin, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Suggested Practices for Registration
    of Internationalized Domain Names (IDN)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4290]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4290]{.seriesInfo}, December
    2005, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4290>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#Acknowledgements}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

The authors especially thank the authors of
\[[RFC5730](#RFC5730){.xref}\] and \[[RFC5731](#RFC5731){.xref}\] and
the following members of the China Internet Network Information Center
(CNNIC): [Weiping Yang]{.contact-name}, [Chao
Qi]{.contact-name}.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}

Useful comments were made by [John Klensin]{.contact-name}, [Scott
Hollenbeck]{.contact-name}, [Patrick Mevzek]{.contact-name}, [Edward
Lewis]{.contact-name}, [Wil Tan]{.contact-name}, and [Adrian
Farrel]{.contact-name}.[¶](#appendix-A-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jiankang Yao]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[CNNIC]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[4 South 4th Street, Zhongguancun, Haidian District]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Beijing]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Beijing]{.region}, [100190]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[China]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+86 10 5881 3007](tel:+86%2010%205881%203007){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <yaojk@cnnic.cn>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Linlin Zhou]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[CNNIC]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[4 South 4th Street, Zhongguancun, Haidian District]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Beijing]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Beijing]{.region}, [100190]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[China]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+86 10 5881 2677](tel:+86%2010%205881%202677){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <zhoulinlin@cnnic.cn>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Hongtao Li]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[CNNIC]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[4 South 4th Street, Zhongguancun, Haidian District]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Beijing]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Beijing]{.region}, [100190]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[China]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <lihongtao@cnnic.cn>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ning Kong]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Consultant]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <ietfing@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jiagui Xie]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: email
Email: <jiagui1984@163.com>
:::
:::
:::
