  RFC 9119          Multicast Over IEEE 802 Wireless   October 2021
  ----------------- ---------------------------------- --------------
  Perkins, et al.   Informational                      \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9119){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   October 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    C. Perkins
    :::

    ::: org
    Lupin Lodge
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. McBride
    :::

    ::: org
    Futurewei
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    D. Stanley
    :::

    ::: org
    HPE
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    W. Kumari
    :::

    ::: org
    Google
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    JC. Zúñiga
    :::

    ::: org
    SIGFOX
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9119 {#rfcnum}

# Multicast Considerations over IEEE 802 Wireless Media {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

Well-known issues with multicast have prevented the deployment of
multicast in 802.11 (Wi-Fi) and other local-area wireless environments.
This document describes the known limitations of wireless (primarily
802.11) Layer 2 multicast. Also described are certain multicast
enhancement features that have been specified by the IETF and by IEEE
802 for wireless media, as well as some operational choices that can be
made to improve the performance of the network. Finally, some
recommendations are provided about the usage and combination of these
features and operational choices.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Not all documents approved
by the IESG are candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see
Section 2 of RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9119>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
Simplified BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Identified Multicast
    Issues](#name-identified-multicast-issues){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [Issues at Layer 2 and
        Below](#name-issues-at-layer-2-and-below){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.1}
            [3.1.1](#section-3.1.1){.xref}.  [Multicast
            Reliability](#name-multicast-reliability){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.2}
            [3.1.2](#section-3.1.2){.xref}.  [Lower and Variable Data
            Rate](#name-lower-and-variable-data-rat){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.3}
            [3.1.3](#section-3.1.3){.xref}.  [Capacity and Impact on
            Interference](#name-capacity-and-impact-on-inte){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1.2.4}
            [3.1.4](#section-3.1.4){.xref}.  [Power-Save Effects on
            Multicast](#name-power-save-effects-on-multi){.xref}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [Issues at Layer 3 and
        Above](#name-issues-at-layer-3-and-above){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.1}
            [3.2.1](#section-3.2.1){.xref}.  [IPv4
            Issues](#name-ipv4-issues){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.2}
            [3.2.2](#section-3.2.2){.xref}.  [IPv6
            Issues](#name-ipv6-issues){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.3}
            [3.2.3](#section-3.2.3){.xref}.  [MLD
            Issues](#name-mld-issues){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2.2.4}
            [3.2.4](#section-3.2.4){.xref}.  [Spurious Neighbor
            Discovery](#name-spurious-neighbor-discovery){.xref}
            :::
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Multicast Protocol
    Optimizations](#name-multicast-protocol-optimiza){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [Proxy ARP in
        802.11-2012](#name-proxy-arp-in-80211-2012){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2}
        [4.2](#section-4.2){.xref}.  [IPv6 Address Registration and
        Proxy Neighbor
        Discovery](#name-ipv6-address-registration-a){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3}
        [4.3](#section-4.3){.xref}.  [Buffering to Improve Battery
        Life](#name-buffering-to-improve-batter){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.4}
        [4.4](#section-4.4){.xref}.  [Limiting Multicast Buffer Hardware
        Queue Depth](#name-limiting-multicast-buffer-h){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.5}
        [4.5](#section-4.5){.xref}.  [IPv6 Support in
        802.11-2012](#name-ipv6-support-in-80211-2012){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.6}
        [4.6](#section-4.6){.xref}.  [Using Unicast Instead of
        Multicast](#name-using-unicast-instead-of-mu){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.6.2.1}
            [4.6.1](#section-4.6.1){.xref}.  [Overview](#name-overview){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.6.2.2}
            [4.6.2](#section-4.6.2){.xref}.  [Layer 2 Conversion to
            Unicast](#name-layer-2-conversion-to-unica){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.6.2.3}
            [4.6.3](#section-4.6.3){.xref}.  [Directed Multicast Service
            (DMS)](#name-directed-multicast-service-){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.6.2.4}
            [4.6.4](#section-4.6.4){.xref}.  [Automatic Multicast
            Tunneling (AMT)](#name-automatic-multicast-tunneli){.xref}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.7}
        [4.7](#section-4.7){.xref}.  [GroupCast with Retries
        (GCR)](#name-groupcast-with-retries-gcr){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Operational
    Optimizations](#name-operational-optimizations){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [Mitigating Problems from Spurious
        Neighbor Discovery](#name-mitigating-problems-from-sp){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [Mitigating Spurious Service
        Discovery Messages](#name-mitigating-spurious-service){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Multicast Considerations for Other
    Wireless Media](#name-multicast-considerations-fo){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Recommendations](#name-recommendations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Ongoing Discussion
    Items](#name-ongoing-discussion-items){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [11](#section-11){.xref}. [Informative
    References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.13}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#intro}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

Well-known issues with multicast have prevented the deployment of
multicast in 802.11 \[[dot11](#dot11){.xref}\] and other local-area
wireless environments, as described in \[[mc-props](#mc-props){.xref}\]
and \[[mc-prob-stmt](#mc-prob-stmt){.xref}\]. Performance issues have
been observed when multicast packet transmissions of IETF protocols are
used over IEEE 802 wireless media. Even though enhancements for
multicast transmissions have been designed at both IETF and IEEE 802,
incompatibilities still exist between specifications, implementations,
and configuration choices.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

Many IETF protocols depend on multicast/broadcast for delivery of
control messages to multiple receivers. Multicast allows data to be sent
to multiple interested recipients without the source needing to send
duplicate data to each recipient. With broadcast traffic, data is sent
to every device regardless of their expressed interest in the data.
Multicast is used for various purposes such as Neighbor Discovery,
network flooding, and address resolution, as well as minimizing media
occupancy for the transmission of data that is intended for multiple
receivers. In addition to protocol use of broadcast/multicast for
control messages, more applications, such as Push To Talk in hospitals
or video in enterprises, universities, and homes, are sending multicast
IP to end-user devices, which are increasingly using Wi-Fi for their
connectivity.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

IETF protocols typically rely on network protocol layering in order to
reduce or eliminate any dependence of higher-level protocols on the
specific nature of the MAC-layer protocols or the physical media. In the
case of multicast transmissions, higher-level protocols have
traditionally been designed as if transmitting a packet to an IP address
had the same cost in interference and network media access, regardless
of whether the destination IP address is a unicast address or a
multicast or broadcast address. This model was reasonable for networks
where the physical medium was wired, like Ethernet. Unfortunately, for
many wireless media, the costs to access the medium can be quite
different. Multicast over Wi-Fi has often been plagued by such poor
performance that it is disallowed. Some enhancements have been designed
in IETF protocols that are assumed to work primarily over wireless
media. However, these enhancements are usually implemented in limited
deployments and are not widespread on most wireless
networks.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

IEEE 802 wireless protocols have been designed with certain features to
support multicast traffic. For instance, lower modulations are used to
transmit multicast frames so that these can be received by all stations
in the cell, regardless of the distance or path attenuation from the
base station or Access Point (AP). However, these lower modulation
transmissions occupy the medium longer; they hamper efficient
transmission of traffic using higher-order modulations to nearby
stations. For these and other reasons, IEEE 802 Working Groups such as
802.11 have designed features to improve the performance of multicast
transmissions at Layer 2 \[[ietf_802-11](#ietf_802-11){.xref}\]. In
addition to protocol design features, certain operational and
configuration enhancements can ameliorate the network performance issues
created by multicast traffic, as described in [Section
5](#optim3){.xref}.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

There seems to be general agreement that these problems will not be
fixed anytime soon, primarily because it\'s expensive to do so and
because of the unreliability of multicast. Compared to unicast over
Wi-Fi, multicast is often treated as somewhat of a second-class citizen
even though there are many protocols using multicast. Something needs to
be provided in order to make them more reliable. IPv6 Neighbor Discovery
saturating the Wi-Fi link is only part of the problem. Wi-Fi traffic
classes may help. This document is intended to help make the
determination about what problems should be solved by the IETF and what
problems should be solved by the IEEE (see [Section
8](#discussion){.xref}).[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

This document details various problems caused by multicast transmission
over wireless networks, including high packet error rates, no
acknowledgements, and low data rate. It also explains some enhancements
that have been designed at the IETF and IEEE 802.11 to ameliorate the
effects of the radio medium on multicast traffic. Recommendations are
also provided to implementors about how to use and combine these
enhancements. Some advice about the operational choices that can be made
is also included. It is likely that this document will also be
considered relevant to designers of future IEEE wireless
specifications.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#def}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

This document uses the following definitions:[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

ACK
:   The 802.11 Layer 2 acknowledgement.[¶](#section-2-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

AES-CCMP
:   AES-Counter Mode CBC-MAC Protocol[¶](#section-2-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

AP
:   IEEE 802.11 Access Point.[¶](#section-2-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Basic rate
:   The slowest rate of all the connected devices at which multicast and
    broadcast traffic is generally
    transmitted.[¶](#section-2-2.8){.pilcrow}
:   

DVB-H
:   Digital Video Broadcasting - Handheld[¶](#section-2-2.10){.pilcrow}
:   

DVB-IPDC
:   Digital Video Broadcasting - Internet Protocol
    Datacasting[¶](#section-2-2.12){.pilcrow}
:   

DTIM
:   Delivery Traffic Indication Map; an information element that
    advertises whether or not any associated stations have buffered
    multicast or broadcast frames.[¶](#section-2-2.14){.pilcrow}
:   

MCS
:   Modulation and Coding Scheme.[¶](#section-2-2.16){.pilcrow}
:   

NOC
:   Network Operations Center.[¶](#section-2-2.18){.pilcrow}
:   

PER
:   Packet Error Rate.[¶](#section-2-2.20){.pilcrow}
:   

STA
:   802.11 station (e.g., handheld
    device).[¶](#section-2-2.22){.pilcrow}
:   

TIM
:   Traffic Indication Map; an information element that advertises
    whether or not any associated stations have buffered unicast
    frames.[¶](#section-2-2.24){.pilcrow}
:   

TKIP
:   Temporal Key Integrity Protocol[¶](#section-2-2.26){.pilcrow}
:   

WiMAX
:   Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave
    Access[¶](#section-2-2.28){.pilcrow}
:   

WPA
:   Wi-Fi Protected Access[¶](#section-2-2.30){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#multicast_issues}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Identified Multicast Issues](#name-identified-multicast-issues){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-identified-multicast-issues}

::: {#l2_issues}
::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Issues at Layer 2 and Below](#name-issues-at-layer-2-and-below){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-issues-at-layer-2-and-below}

In this section, some of the issues related to the use of multicast
transmissions over IEEE 802 wireless technologies are
described.[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#reliability}
::: {#section-3.1.1 .section}
#### [3.1.1.](#section-3.1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Multicast Reliability](#name-multicast-reliability){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-multicast-reliability}

Multicast traffic is typically much less reliable than unicast traffic.
Since multicast makes point-to-multipoint communications, multiple
acknowledgements would be needed to guarantee reception at all
recipients. However, since there are no ACKs for multicast packets, it
is not possible for the AP to know whether or not a retransmission is
needed. Even in the wired Internet, this characteristic often causes
undesirably high error rates. This has contributed to the relatively
slow uptake of multicast applications even though the protocols have
long been available. The situation for wireless links is much worse and
is quite sensitive to the presence of background traffic. Consequently,
there can be a high packet error rate (PER) due to lack of
retransmission and because the sender never backs off. PER is the ratio,
in percent, of the number of packets not successfully received by the
device. It is not uncommon for there to be a packet loss rate of 5% or
more, which is particularly troublesome for video and other environments
where high data rates and high reliability are
required.[¶](#section-3.1.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#lower_rate}
::: {#section-3.1.2 .section}
#### [3.1.2.](#section-3.1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Lower and Variable Data Rate](#name-lower-and-variable-data-rat){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-lower-and-variable-data-rat}

Multicast over wired differs from multicast over wireless because
transmission over wired links often occurs at a fixed rate. Wi-Fi, on
the other hand, has a transmission rate that varies depending upon the
STA\'s proximity to the AP. The throughput of video flows and the
capacity of the broader Wi-Fi network will change with device movement.
This impacts the ability for QoS solutions to effectively reserve
bandwidth and provide admission control.[¶](#section-3.1.2-1){.pilcrow}

For wireless stations authenticated and linked with an AP, the power
necessary for good reception can vary from station to station. For
unicast, the goal is to minimize power requirements while maximizing the
data rate to the destination. For multicast, the goal is simply to
maximize the number of receivers that will correctly receive the
multicast packet; generally, the AP has to use a much lower data rate at
a power level high enough for even the farthest station to receive the
packet, for example, as briefly mentioned in [Section
4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5757#section-4){.relref} of
\[[RFC5757](#RFC5757){.xref}\]. Consequently, the data rate of a video
stream, for instance, would be constrained by the environmental
considerations of the least-reliable receiver associated with the
AP.[¶](#section-3.1.2-2){.pilcrow}

Because more robust modulation and coding schemes (MCSs) have a longer
range but also a lower data rate, multicast/broadcast traffic is
generally transmitted at the slowest rate of all the connected devices.
This is also known as the basic rate. The amount of additional
interference depends on the specific wireless technology. In fact,
backward compatibility and multi-stream implementations mean that the
maximum unicast rates are currently up to a few Gbps, so there can be
more than 3 orders of magnitude difference in the transmission rate
between multicast/broadcast versus optimal unicast forwarding. Some
techniques employed to increase spectral efficiency, such as spatial
multiplexing in Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) systems, are not
available with more than one intended receiver; it is not the case that
backwards compatibility is the only factor responsible for lower
multicast transmission rates.[¶](#section-3.1.2-3){.pilcrow}

Wired multicast also affects wireless LANs when the AP extends the wired
segment; in that case, multicast/broadcast frames on the wired LAN side
are copied to the Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN). Since broadcast
messages are transmitted at the most robust MCS, many large frames are
sent at a slow rate over the air.[¶](#section-3.1.2-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#interference}
::: {#section-3.1.3 .section}
#### [3.1.3.](#section-3.1.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Capacity and Impact on Interference](#name-capacity-and-impact-on-inte){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-capacity-and-impact-on-inte}

Transmissions at a lower rate require longer occupancy of the wireless
medium and thus take away from the airtime of other communications and
degrade the overall capacity. Furthermore, transmission at higher power,
as is required to reach all multicast STAs associated with the AP,
proportionately increases the area of interference with other consumers
of the radio spectrum.[¶](#section-3.1.3-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#power_save}
::: {#section-3.1.4 .section}
#### [3.1.4.](#section-3.1.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Power-Save Effects on Multicast](#name-power-save-effects-on-multi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-power-save-effects-on-multi}

One of the characteristics of multicast transmission over Wi-Fi is that
every station has to be configured to wake up to receive the multicast
frame, even though the received packet may ultimately be discarded. This
process can have a large effect on the power consumption by the
multicast receiver station. For this reason, there are workarounds, such
as Directed Multicast Service (DMS) described in [Section
4](#optim2){.xref}, to prevent unnecessarily waking up
stations.[¶](#section-3.1.4-1){.pilcrow}

Multicast (and unicast) can work poorly with the power-save mechanisms
defined in IEEE 802.11e for the following
reasons.[¶](#section-3.1.4-2){.pilcrow}

-   [Clients may be unable to stay in sleep mode due to multicast
    control packets frequently waking them
    up.[¶](#section-3.1.4-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.4-3.1}
-   [A unicast packet is delayed until an STA wakes up and requests it.
    Unicast traffic may also be delayed to improve power save and
    efficiency and to increase the probability of
    aggregation.[¶](#section-3.1.4-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.4-3.2}
-   [Multicast traffic is delayed in a wireless network if any of the
    STAs in that network are power savers. All STAs associated with the
    AP have to be awake at a known time to receive multicast
    traffic.[¶](#section-3.1.4-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.4-3.3}
-   [Packets can also be discarded due to buffer limitations in the AP
    and non-AP
    STA.[¶](#section-3.1.4-3.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1.4-3.4}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#l3_issues}
::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Issues at Layer 3 and Above](#name-issues-at-layer-3-and-above){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-issues-at-layer-3-and-above}

This section identifies some representative IETF protocols and describes
possible negative effects due to performance degradation when using
multicast transmissions for control messages. Common uses of multicast
include:[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Control plane
    signaling[¶](#section-3.2-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.1}
-   [Neighbor
    Discovery[¶](#section-3.2-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.2}
-   [Address
    resolution[¶](#section-3.2-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.3}
-   [Service Discovery[¶](#section-3.2-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.4}
-   [Applications (video delivery, stock data,
    etc.)[¶](#section-3.2-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.5}
-   [On-demand routing[¶](#section-3.2-2.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.6}
-   [Backbone
    construction[¶](#section-3.2-2.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.7}
-   [Other Layer 3 protocols
    (non-IP)[¶](#section-3.2-2.8){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-2.8}

User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is the most common transport-layer protocol
for multicast applications. By itself, UDP is not reliable \-- messages
may be lost or delivered out of order.[¶](#section-3.2-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#IPv4}
::: {#section-3.2.1 .section}
#### [3.2.1.](#section-3.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [IPv4 Issues](#name-ipv4-issues){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ipv4-issues}

The following list contains some representative discovery protocols that
utilize broadcast/multicast and are used with
IPv4.[¶](#section-3.2.1-1){.pilcrow}

-   [ARP
    \[[RFC0826](#RFC0826){.xref}\][¶](#section-3.2.1-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.1-2.1}
-   [DHCP
    \[[RFC2131](#RFC2131){.xref}\][¶](#section-3.2.1-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.1-2.2}
-   [Multicast DNS (mDNS)
    \[[RFC6762](#RFC6762){.xref}\][¶](#section-3.2.1-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.1-2.3}
-   [Universal Plug and Play (uPnP)
    \[[RFC6970](#RFC6970){.xref}\][¶](#section-3.2.1-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.1-2.4}

After initial configuration, ARP (described in more detail later), DHCP,
and uPnP occur much less commonly, but service discovery can occur at
any time. Some widely deployed service discovery protocols (e.g., for
finding a printer) utilize mDNS (i.e., multicast), which is often
dropped by operators. Even if multicast snooping
\[[RFC4541](#RFC4541){.xref}\] (which provides the benefit of conserving
bandwidth on those segments of the network where no node has expressed
interest in receiving packets addressed to the group address) is
utilized, many devices can register at once and cause serious network
degradation.[¶](#section-3.2.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#IPv6}
::: {#section-3.2.2 .section}
#### [3.2.2.](#section-3.2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [IPv6 Issues](#name-ipv6-issues){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ipv6-issues}

IPv6 makes extensive use of multicast, including the
following:[¶](#section-3.2.2-1){.pilcrow}

-   [DHCPv6
    \[[RFC8415](#RFC8415){.xref}\][¶](#section-3.2.2-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.2-2.1}
-   [Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM)
    \[[RFC7761](#RFC7761){.xref}\][¶](#section-3.2.2-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.2-2.2}
-   [IPv6 Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP)
    \[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\][¶](#section-3.2.2-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.2-2.3}
-   [Multicast DNS (mDNS)
    \[[RFC6762](#RFC6762){.xref}\][¶](#section-3.2.2-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.2-2.4}
-   [Router Discovery
    \[[RFC4286](#RFC4286){.xref}\][¶](#section-3.2.2-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2.2-2.5}

IPv6 NDP Neighbor Solicitation (NS) messages used in Duplicate Address
Detection (DAD) and address lookup make use of link-scope multicast. In
contrast to IPv4, an IPv6 node will typically use multiple addresses and
may change them often for privacy reasons. This intensifies the impact
of multicast messages that are associated with the mobility of a node.
Router advertisement (RA) messages are also periodically multicast over
the link.[¶](#section-3.2.2-3){.pilcrow}

Neighbors may be considered lost if several consecutive Neighbor
Discovery packets fail.[¶](#section-3.2.2-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#mld}
::: {#section-3.2.3 .section}
#### [3.2.3.](#section-3.2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [MLD Issues](#name-mld-issues){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-mld-issues}

Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) \[[RFC4541](#RFC4541){.xref}\] is
used to identify members of a multicast group that are connected to the
ports of a switch. Forwarding multicast frames into a Wi-Fi-enabled area
can use switch support for hardware forwarding state information.
However, since IPv6 makes heavy use of multicast, each STA with an IPv6
address will require state on the switch for several and possibly many
solicited-node multicast addresses. A solicited-node multicast address
is an IPv6 multicast address used by NDP to verify whether an IPv6
address is already used by the local link. Multicast addresses that do
not have forwarding state installed (perhaps due to hardware memory
limitations on the switch) cause frames to be flooded on all ports of
the switch. Some switch vendors do not support MLD for link-scope
multicast due to the increase it can cause in
state.[¶](#section-3.2.3-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#spurious}
::: {#section-3.2.4 .section}
#### [3.2.4.](#section-3.2.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Spurious Neighbor Discovery](#name-spurious-neighbor-discovery){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-spurious-neighbor-discovery}

On the Internet, there is a \"background radiation\" of scanning traffic
(people scanning for vulnerable machines) and backscatter (responses
from spoofed traffic, etc.). This means that routers very often receive
packets destined for IPv4 addresses regardless of whether those IP
addresses are in use. In the cases where the IP is assigned to a host,
the router broadcasts an ARP request, receives an ARP reply, and caches
it; then, traffic can be delivered to the host. When the IP address is
not in use, the router broadcasts one (or more) ARP requests and never
gets a reply. This means that it does not populate the ARP cache, and
the next time there is traffic for that IP address, the router will
rebroadcast the ARP requests.[¶](#section-3.2.4-1){.pilcrow}

The rate of these ARP requests is proportional to the size of the
subnets, the rate of scanning and backscatter, and how long the router
keeps state on non-responding ARPs. As it turns out, this rate is
inversely proportional to how occupied the subnet is (valid ARPs end up
in a cache, stopping the broadcasting; unused IPs never respond, and so
cause more broadcasts). Depending on the address space in use, the time
of day, how occupied the subnet is, and other unknown factors, thousands
of broadcasts per second have been observed. Around 2,000 broadcasts per
second have been observed at the IETF NOC during face-to-face
meetings.[¶](#section-3.2.4-2){.pilcrow}

With Neighbor Discovery for IPv6 \[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\], nodes
accomplish address resolution by multicasting a Neighbor Solicitation
that asks the target node to return its link-layer address. Neighbor
Solicitation messages are multicast to the solicited-node multicast
address of the target address. The target returns its link-layer address
in a unicast Neighbor Advertisement message. A single request-response
pair of packets is sufficient for both the initiator and the target to
resolve each other\'s link-layer addresses; the initiator includes its
link-layer address in the Neighbor
Solicitation.[¶](#section-3.2.4-3){.pilcrow}

On a wired network, there is not a huge difference between unicast,
multicast, and broadcast traffic. Due to hardware filtering (see, e.g.,
\[[Deri-2010](#Deri-2010){.xref}\]), inadvertently flooded traffic (or
excessive Ethernet multicast) on wired networks can be quite a bit less
costly compared to wireless cases where sleeping devices have to wake up
to process packets. Wired Ethernets tend to be switched networks,
further reducing interference from multicast. There is effectively no
collision / scheduling problem except at extremely high port
utilizations.[¶](#section-3.2.4-4){.pilcrow}

This is not true in the wireless realm; wireless equipment is often
unable to send high volumes of broadcast and multicast traffic, causing
numerous broadcast and multicast packets to be dropped. Consequently,
when a host connects, it is often not able to complete DHCP, and IPv6
RAs get dropped, leading to users being unable to use the
network.[¶](#section-3.2.4-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#optim2}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Multicast Protocol Optimizations](#name-multicast-protocol-optimiza){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-multicast-protocol-optimiza}

This section lists some optimizations that have been specified in IEEE
802 and IETF that are aimed at reducing or eliminating the issues
discussed in [Section
3](#multicast_issues){.xref}.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#proxy-arp}
::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Proxy ARP in 802.11-2012](#name-proxy-arp-in-80211-2012){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-proxy-arp-in-80211-2012}

The AP knows the Medium Access Control (MAC) address and IP address for
all associated STAs. In this way, the AP acts as the central \"manager\"
for all the 802.11 STAs in its Basic Service Set (BSS). Proxy ARP is
easy to implement at the AP and offers the following
advantages:[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Reduced broadcast traffic (transmitted at low MCS) on the wireless
    medium.[¶](#section-4.1-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.1-2.1}
-   [STA benefits from extended power save in sleep mode, as ARP
    requests for STA\'s IP address are handled instead by the
    AP.[¶](#section-4.1-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.1-2.2}
-   [ARP frames are kept off the wireless
    medium.[¶](#section-4.1-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.1-2.3}
-   [No changes are needed to STA
    implementation.[¶](#section-4.1-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.1-2.4}

Here is the specification language as described in clause 10.23.13 of
\[[dot11-proxyarp](#dot11-proxyarp){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-4.1-3){.pilcrow}

> When the AP supports Proxy ARP \"\[\...\] the AP shall maintain a
> Hardware Address to Internet Address mapping for each associated
> station, and shall update the mapping when the Internet Address of the
> associated station changes. When the IPv4 address being resolved in
> the ARP request packet is used by a non-AP STA currently associated to
> the BSS, the proxy ARP service shall respond on behalf of the STA to
> an ARP request or an ARP Probe.[¶](#section-4.1-4.1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#proxy-ND}
::: {#section-4.2 .section}
### [4.2.](#section-4.2){.section-number .selfRef} [IPv6 Address Registration and Proxy Neighbor Discovery](#name-ipv6-address-registration-a){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ipv6-address-registration-a}

As used in this section, a Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Network
(6LoWPAN) denotes a Low-Power and Lossy Network (LLN) that supports
[6LoWPAN Header Compression (HC)](#RFC6282){.xref}
\[[RFC6282](#RFC6282){.xref}\]. A [6TiSCH network](#RFC9030){.xref}
\[[RFC9030](#RFC9030){.xref}\] is an example of a 6LoWPAN. In order to
control the use of IPv6 multicast over 6LoWPANs, the [6LoWPAN Neighbor
Discovery (6LoWPAN ND)](#RFC6775){.xref} \[[RFC6775](#RFC6775){.xref}\]
standard defines an address registration mechanism that relies on a
central registry to assess address uniqueness as a substitute to the
inefficient DAD mechanism found in the mainstream IPv6 Neighbor
Discovery Protocol (NDP) \[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\]
\[[RFC4862](#RFC4862){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4.2-1){.pilcrow}

The 6lo Working Group has specified an [update](#RFC8505){.xref} to
\[[RFC6775](#RFC6775){.xref}\]. Wireless devices can register their
address to a [Backbone Router](#RFC8929){.xref}
\[[RFC8929](#RFC8929){.xref}\], which proxies for the registered
addresses with the IPv6 NDP running on a high-speed aggregating
backbone. The update also enables a proxy registration mechanism on
behalf of the Registered Node, e.g., by a 6LoWPAN router to which the
mobile node is attached.[¶](#section-4.2-2){.pilcrow}

The general idea behind the Backbone Router concept is that broadcast
and multicast messaging should be tightly controlled in a variety of
WLANs and Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs). Connectivity to a
particular link that provides the subnet should be left to Layer 3. The
model for the Backbone Router operation is represented in [Figure
1](#figBackbone){.xref}.[¶](#section-4.2-3){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-backbone-link-and-backbone-}

::: {#figBackbone}
::: {#section-4.2-4.1 .alignLeft .art-text .artwork}
                  |
                +-----+
                |     | Gateway (default) router
                |     |
                +-----+
                   |
                   |      Backbone Link
             +--------------------+------------------+
             |                    |                  |
          +-----+             +-----+             +-----+
          |     | Backbone    |     | Backbone    |     | Backbone
          |     | router 1    |     | router 2    |     | router 3
          +-----+             +-----+             +-----+
             o                o   o  o              o o
         o o   o  o       o o   o  o  o         o  o  o  o o
        o  o o  o o       o   o  o  o  o        o  o  o o o
        o   o  o  o          o    o  o           o  o   o
          o   o o               o  o                 o o

            LLN 1              LLN 2                LLN 3
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [Backbone Link and Backbone
Routers](#name-backbone-link-and-backbone-){.selfRef}
:::

LLN nodes can move freely from an LLN anchored at one IPv6 Backbone
Router to an LLN anchored at another Backbone Router on the same
backbone, keeping any of the IPv6 addresses they have configured. The
Backbone Routers maintain a Binding Table of their Registered Nodes,
which serves as a distributed database of all the LLN nodes. An
extension to the Neighbor Discovery Protocol is introduced to exchange
Binding Table information across the Backbone Link as needed for the
operation of IPv6 Neighbor Discovery.[¶](#section-4.2-5){.pilcrow}

\[[RFC6775](#RFC6775){.xref}\] and follow-on work
\[[RFC8505](#RFC8505){.xref}\] address the needs of LLNs, and similar
techniques are likely to be valuable on any type of link where sleeping
devices are attached or where the use of broadcast and multicast
operations should be limited.[¶](#section-4.2-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#buffer}
::: {#section-4.3 .section}
### [4.3.](#section-4.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Buffering to Improve Battery Life](#name-buffering-to-improve-batter){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-buffering-to-improve-batter}

Methods have been developed to help save battery life; for example, a
device might not wake up when the AP receives a multicast packet. The AP
acts on behalf of STAs in various ways. To enable use of the
power-saving feature for STAs in its BSS, the AP buffers frames for
delivery to the STA at the time when the STA is scheduled for reception.
If an AP, for instance, expresses a Delivery Traffic Indication Message
(DTIM) of 3, then the AP will send a multicast packet every 3 packets.
In fact, when any single wireless STA associated with an AP has 802.11
power-save mode enabled, the AP buffers all multicast frames and sends
them only after the next DTIM beacon.[¶](#section-4.3-1){.pilcrow}

In practice, most APs will send a multicast every 30 packets. For
unicast, the AP could send a Traffic Indication Message (TIM), but, for
multicast, the AP sends a broadcast to everyone. DTIM does power
management, but STAs can choose whether to wake up and whether to drop
the packet. Unfortunately, without proper administrative control, such
STAs may be unable to determine why their multicast operations do not
work.[¶](#section-4.3-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-4.4 .section}
### [4.4.](#section-4.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Limiting Multicast Buffer Hardware Queue Depth](#name-limiting-multicast-buffer-h){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-limiting-multicast-buffer-h}

The Content after Beacon (CAB) queue is used for beacon-triggered
transmission of buffered multicast frames. If lots of multicast frames
were buffered and this queue fills up, it drowns out all regular
traffic. To limit the damage that buffered traffic can do, some drivers
limit the amount of queued multicast data to a fraction of the
beacon_interval. An example of this is
\[[CAB](#CAB){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4.4-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#ipv6}
::: {#section-4.5 .section}
### [4.5.](#section-4.5){.section-number .selfRef} [IPv6 Support in 802.11-2012](#name-ipv6-support-in-80211-2012){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ipv6-support-in-80211-2012}

IPv6 uses NDP instead of ARP. Every IPv6 node subscribes to a special
multicast address for this purpose.[¶](#section-4.5-1){.pilcrow}

Here is the specification language from clause 10.23.13 of
\[[dot11-proxyarp](#dot11-proxyarp){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-4.5-2){.pilcrow}

> When an IPv6 address is being resolved, the Proxy Neighbor Discovery
> service shall respond with a Neighbor Advertisement message \[\...\]
> on behalf of an associated STA to an \[ICMPv6\] Neighbor Solicitation
> message \[\...\]. When MAC address mappings change, the AP may send
> unsolicited Neighbor Advertisement Messages on behalf of a
> STA.[¶](#section-4.5-3.1){.pilcrow}

NDP may be used to request additional information using the following
methods, among others:[¶](#section-4.5-4){.pilcrow}

-   [Maximum Transmission
    Unit[¶](#section-4.5-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.5-5.1}
-   [Router
    Solicitation[¶](#section-4.5-5.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.5-5.2}
-   [Router
    Advertisement[¶](#section-4.5-5.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.5-5.3}

NDP messages are sent as group-addressed (broadcast) frames in 802.11.
Using the proxy operation helps to keep NDP messages off the wireless
medium.[¶](#section-4.5-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#convert}
::: {#section-4.6 .section}
### [4.6.](#section-4.6){.section-number .selfRef} [Using Unicast Instead of Multicast](#name-using-unicast-instead-of-mu){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-using-unicast-instead-of-mu}

It is often possible to transmit multicast control and data messages by
using unicast transmissions to each station
individually.[¶](#section-4.6-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#convert-over}
::: {#section-4.6.1 .section}
#### [4.6.1.](#section-4.6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Overview](#name-overview){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-overview}

In many situations, it\'s a good choice to use unicast instead of
multicast over the Wi-Fi link. This avoids most of the problems specific
to multicast over Wi-Fi, since the individual frames are then
acknowledged and buffered for power-save clients in the way that unicast
traffic normally operates.[¶](#section-4.6.1-1){.pilcrow}

This approach comes with the trade-off of sometimes sending the same
packet multiple times over the Wi-Fi link. However, in many cases, such
as video into a residential home network, this can be a good trade-off
since the Wi-Fi link may have enough capacity for the unicast traffic to
be transmitted to each subscribed STA, even though multicast addressing
may have been necessary for the upstream access
network.[¶](#section-4.6.1-2){.pilcrow}

Several technologies exist that can be used to arrange unicast transport
over the Wi-Fi link, outlined in the subsections
below.[¶](#section-4.6.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#convert-l2}
::: {#section-4.6.2 .section}
#### [4.6.2.](#section-4.6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Layer 2 Conversion to Unicast](#name-layer-2-conversion-to-unica){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-layer-2-conversion-to-unica}

It is often possible to transmit multicast control and data messages by
using unicast transmissions to each station
individually.[¶](#section-4.6.2-1){.pilcrow}

Although there is not yet a standardized method of conversion, at least
one widely available implementation exists in the Linux bridging code
\[[bridge-mc-2-uc](#bridge-mc-2-uc){.xref}\]. Other proprietary
implementations are available from various vendors. In general, these
implementations perform a straightforward mapping for groups or
channels, discovered by IGMP or MLD snooping, to the corresponding
unicast MAC addresses.[¶](#section-4.6.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#convert-DMS}
::: {#section-4.6.3 .section}
#### [4.6.3.](#section-4.6.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Directed Multicast Service (DMS)](#name-directed-multicast-service-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-directed-multicast-service-}

DMS enables an STA to request that the AP transmit multicast
group-addressed frames destined to the requesting STAs as individually
addressed frames (i.e., convert multicast to unicast). Here are some
characteristics of DMS:[¶](#section-4.6.3-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Requires 802.11n Aggregate MAC Service Data Units
    (A-MSDUs).[¶](#section-4.6.3-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.6.3-2.1}
-   [Individually addressed frames are acknowledged and are buffered for
    power-save
    STAs.[¶](#section-4.6.3-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.6.3-2.2}
-   [The requesting STA may specify traffic characteristics for DMS
    traffic.[¶](#section-4.6.3-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.6.3-2.3}
-   [DMS was defined in IEEE Std 802.11v-2011
    \[[v2011](#v2011){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4.6.3-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.6.3-2.4}
-   [DMS requires changes to both AP and STA
    implementation.[¶](#section-4.6.3-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.6.3-2.5}

DMS is not currently implemented in products. See
\[[Tramarin2017](#Tramarin2017){.xref}\] and
\[[Oliva2013](#Oliva2013){.xref}\] for more
information.[¶](#section-4.6.3-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#convert-amt}
::: {#section-4.6.4 .section}
#### [4.6.4.](#section-4.6.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Automatic Multicast Tunneling (AMT)](#name-automatic-multicast-tunneli){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-automatic-multicast-tunneli}

AMT \[[RFC7450](#RFC7450){.xref}\] provides a method to tunnel multicast
IP packets inside unicast IP packets over network links that only
support unicast. When an operating system or application running on an
STA has an AMT gateway capability integrated, it\'s possible to use
unicast to traverse the Wi-Fi link by deploying an AMT relay in the
non-Wi-Fi portion of the network connected to the
AP.[¶](#section-4.6.4-1){.pilcrow}

It is recommended that multicast-enabled networks deploying AMT relays
for this purpose make the relays locally discoverable with the following
methods, as described in
\[[RFC8777](#RFC8777){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-4.6.4-2){.pilcrow}

-   [DNS-based Service Discovery (DNS-SD)
    \[[RFC6763](#RFC6763){.xref}\][¶](#section-4.6.4-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.6.4-3.1}
-   [The well-known IP addresses from [Section
    7](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7450#section-7){.relref} of
    \[[RFC7450](#RFC7450){.xref}\][¶](#section-4.6.4-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.6.4-3.2}

An AMT gateway that implements multiple standard discovery methods is
more likely to discover the local multicast-capable network instead of
forming a connection to a nonlocal AMT relay further
upstream.[¶](#section-4.6.4-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#GCR}
::: {#section-4.7 .section}
### [4.7.](#section-4.7){.section-number .selfRef} [GroupCast with Retries (GCR)](#name-groupcast-with-retries-gcr){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-groupcast-with-retries-gcr}

GCR (defined in \[[dot11aa](#dot11aa){.xref}\]) provides greater
reliability by using either unsolicited retries or a block
acknowledgement mechanism. GCR increases the probability of broadcast
frame reception success but still does not guarantee
success.[¶](#section-4.7-1){.pilcrow}

For the block acknowledgement mechanism, the AP transmits each
group-addressed frame as a conventional group-addressed transmission.
Retransmissions are group addressed but hidden from non-11aa STAs. A
directed block acknowledgement scheme is used to harvest reception
status from receivers; retransmissions are based upon these
responses.[¶](#section-4.7-2){.pilcrow}

GCR is suitable for all group sizes including medium to large groups. As
the number of devices in the group increases, GCR can send block
acknowledgement requests to only a small subset of the group. GCR does
require changes to both AP and STA
implementations.[¶](#section-4.7-3){.pilcrow}

GCR may introduce unacceptable latency. After sending a group of data
frames to the group, the AP has to do the
following:[¶](#section-4.7-4){.pilcrow}

-   [Unicast a Block Ack Request (BAR) to a subset of
    members.[¶](#section-4.7-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.7-5.1}
-   [Wait for the corresponding Block Ack
    (BA).[¶](#section-4.7-5.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.7-5.2}
-   [Retransmit any missed
    frames.[¶](#section-4.7-5.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.7-5.3}
-   [Resume other operations that may have been
    delayed.[¶](#section-4.7-5.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.7-5.4}

This latency may not be acceptable for some
traffic.[¶](#section-4.7-6){.pilcrow}

There are ongoing extensions in 802.11 to improve GCR
performance.[¶](#section-4.7-7){.pilcrow}

-   [BAR is sent using downlink Multi-User
    MIMO.[¶](#section-4.7-8.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.7-8.1}
-   [BA is sent using uplink MU-MIMO (uplink MU-MIMO is an IEEE
    801.11ax-2021
    feature).[¶](#section-4.7-8.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.7-8.2}
-   [Latency may also be reduced by simultaneously receiving BA
    information from multiple
    STAs.[¶](#section-4.7-8.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.7-8.3}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#optim3}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Operational Optimizations](#name-operational-optimizations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-operational-optimizations}

This section lists some operational optimizations that can be
implemented when deploying wireless IEEE 802 networks to mitigate some
of the issues discussed in [Section
3](#multicast_issues){.xref}.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#mitigate-spurious}
::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Mitigating Problems from Spurious Neighbor Discovery](#name-mitigating-problems-from-sp){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-mitigating-problems-from-sp}

[]{.break}

ARP Sponges

:   An ARP Sponge sits on a network and learns which IP addresses are
    actually in use. It also listens for ARP requests, and, if it sees
    an ARP for an IP address that it believes is not used, it will reply
    with its own MAC address. This means that the router now has an
    IP-to-MAC mapping, which it caches. If that IP is later assigned to
    a machine (e.g., using DHCP), the ARP Sponge will see this and will
    stop replying for that address. Gratuitous ARPs (or the machine
    ARPing for its gateway) will replace the sponged address in the
    router ARP table. This technique is quite effective; unfortunately,
    the ARP Sponge daemons were not really designed for this use (one of
    the most widely deployed ARP Sponges
    \[[arpsponge](#arpsponge){.xref}\] was designed to deal with the
    disappearance of participants from an Internet Exchange Point (IXP))
    and so are not optimized for this purpose. One daemon is needed per
    subnet; the tuning is tricky (the scanning rate versus the
    population rate versus retries, etc.), and sometimes daemons just
    stop, requiring a restart of the daemon that causes
    disruption.[¶](#section-5.1-1.2.1){.pilcrow}

:   

Router mitigations

:   Some routers (often those based on Linux) implement a \"negative ARP
    cache\" daemon. If the router does not see a reply to an ARP, it can
    be configured to cache this information for some interval.
    Unfortunately, the core routers in use often do not support this.
    Instead, when a host connects to a network and gets an IP address,
    it will ARP for its default gateway (the router). The router will
    update its cache with the IP to host MAC mapping learned from the
    request (passive ARP learning).[¶](#section-5.1-1.4.1){.pilcrow}

:   

Firewall unused space

:   The distribution of users on wireless networks / subnets may change
    in various use cases, such as conference venues (e.g., Service Set
    Identifiers (SSIDs) are renamed, some SSIDs lose favor, etc.). This
    makes utilization for particular SSIDs difficult to predict ahead of
    time, but usage can be monitored as attendees use the different
    networks. Configuring multiple DHCP pools per subnet and enabling
    them sequentially can create a large subnet from which only
    addresses in the lower portions are assigned. Therefore, input IP
    access lists can be applied, which deny traffic to the upper, unused
    portions. Then the router does not attempt to forward packets to the
    unused portions of the subnets and so does not ARP for it. This
    method has proven to be very effective but is somewhat of a blunt
    axe, is fairly labor intensive, and requires
    coordination.[¶](#section-5.1-1.6.1){.pilcrow}

:   

Disabling/Filtering ARP requests

:   In general, the router does not need to ARP for hosts; when a host
    connects, the router can learn the IP-to-MAC mapping from the ARP
    request sent by that host. Consequently, it should be possible to
    disable and/or filter ARP requests from the router. Unfortunately,
    ARP is a very low-level/fundamental part of the IP stack and is
    often offloaded from the normal control plane. While many routers
    can filter Layer 2 traffic, this is usually implemented as an input
    filter and/or has limited ability to filter output broadcast
    traffic. This means that the seemingly simple and obvious solution
    to \"just disable ARP or filter it outbound\" is made difficult or
    awkward in practice by implementations and/or architectural
    issues.[¶](#section-5.1-1.8.1){.pilcrow}

:   

NAT

:   Broadcasts can often be caused by outside Wi-Fi scanning /
    backscatter traffic. In order to reduce the impact of broadcasts,
    NAT can be used on the entire (or a large portion) of a network.
    This would eliminate NAT translation entries for unused addresses,
    and the router would never ARP for them. There are, however, many
    reasons to avoid using NAT in such a blanket
    fashion.[¶](#section-5.1-1.10.1){.pilcrow}

:   

Stateful firewalls
:   Another obvious solution would be to put a stateful firewall between
    the wireless network and the Internet. This firewall would block
    incoming traffic not associated with an outbound request. But this
    conflicts with the need and desire of some organizations to have the
    network as open as possible and to honor the end-to-end principle.
    An attendee on a meeting network should be an Internet host and
    should be able to receive unsolicited requests. Unfortunately,
    keeping the network working and stable is the first priority, and a
    stateful firewall may be required in order to achieve
    this.[¶](#section-5.1-1.12){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#mitigate-spurious-sd}
::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Mitigating Spurious Service Discovery Messages](#name-mitigating-spurious-service){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-mitigating-spurious-service}

In networks that must support hundreds of STAs, operators have observed
network degradation due to many devices simultaneously registering with
mDNS. In a network with many clients, it is recommended to ensure that
mDNS packets designed to discover services in smaller home networks be
constrained to avoid disrupting other
traffic.[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#other-media}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Multicast Considerations for Other Wireless Media](#name-multicast-considerations-fo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-multicast-considerations-fo}

Many of the causes of performance degradation described in earlier
sections are also observable for wireless media other than
802.11.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

For instance, problems with power save, excess media occupancy, and poor
reliability will also affect 802.15.3 and 802.15.4. Unfortunately,
802.15 media specifications do not yet include mechanisms similar to
those developed for 802.11. In fact, the design philosophy for 802.15 is
oriented towards minimality, with the result that many such functions
are relegated to operation within higher-layer protocols. This leads to
a patchwork of non-interoperable and vendor-specific solutions. See
\[[uli](#uli){.xref}\] for additional discussion and a proposal for a
task group to resolve similar issues, in which the multicast problems
might be considered for mitigation.[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

Similar considerations hold for most other wireless media. A brief
introduction is provided in \[[RFC5757](#RFC5757){.xref}\] for the
following:[¶](#section-6-3){.pilcrow}

-   [802.16 WiMAX[¶](#section-6-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-4.1}
-   [3GPP/3GPP2[¶](#section-6-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-4.2}
-   [DVB-H/DVB-IPDC[¶](#section-6-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-4.3}
-   [TV Broadcast and Satellite
    Networks[¶](#section-6-4.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-4.4}
:::
:::

::: {#recommendations}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Recommendations](#name-recommendations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-recommendations}

This section provides some recommendations about the usage and
combinations of some of the multicast enhancements described in Sections
[4](#optim2){.xref} and [5](#optim3){.xref}.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

Future protocol documents utilizing multicast signaling should be
carefully scrutinized if the protocol is likely to be used over wireless
media.[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}

The use of proxy methods should be encouraged to conserve network
bandwidth and power utilization by low-power devices. The device can
send a unicast message to its proxy, and then the proxy can take care of
any needed multicast operations.[¶](#section-7-3){.pilcrow}

Multicast signaling for wireless devices should be done in a way that is
compatible with low duty-cycle operation.[¶](#section-7-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#discussion}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Ongoing Discussion Items](#name-ongoing-discussion-items){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ongoing-discussion-items}

This section suggests two discussion items for further
resolution.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

First, standards (and private) organizations should develop guidelines
to help clarify when multicast packets would be better served by being
sent wired rather than wireless. For example, 802.1ak
\[[IEEE802.1ak](#IEEE802.1ak){.xref}\] works on both Ethernet and Wi-Fi,
and organizations could help with deployment decision making by
developing guidelines for multicast over Wi-Fi, including options for
when traffic should be sent wired.[¶](#section-8-2){.pilcrow}

Second, reliable registration to Layer 2 multicast groups and a reliable
multicast operation at Layer 2 might provide a good multicast over Wi-Fi
solution. There shouldn\'t be a need to support 2^24^ groups to get
solicited node multicast working: it is possible to simply select a
number of bits that make sense for a given network size to limit the
number of unwanted deliveries to reasonable levels. The IEEE 802.1,
802.11, and 802.15 Working Groups should be encouraged to revisit Layer
2 multicast issues and provide workable
solutions.[¶](#section-8-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sec}
::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

This document does not introduce or modify any security mechanisms.
Multicast deployed on wired or wireless networks as discussed in this
document can be made more secure in a variety of ways.
\[[RFC4601](#RFC4601){.xref}\], for instance, specifies the use of IPsec
to ensure authentication of the link-local messages in the Protocol
Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) routing protocol.
\[[RFC5796](#RFC5796){.xref}\] specifies mechanisms to authenticate the
PIM-SM link-local messages using the IP security (IPsec) Encapsulating
Security Payload (ESP) or (optionally) the Authentication Header
(AH).[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

When using mechanisms that convert multicast traffic to unicast traffic
for traversing radio links, the AP (or other entity) is forced to
explicitly track which subscribers care about certain multicast traffic.
This is generally a reasonable trade-off but does result in another
entity that is tracking what entities subscribe to which multicast
traffic. While such information is already (by necessity) tracked
elsewhere, this does present an expansion of the attack surface for that
potentially privacy-sensitive information.[¶](#section-9-2){.pilcrow}

As noted in \[[group_key](#group_key){.xref}\], the unreliable nature of
multicast transmission over wireless media can cause subtle problems
with multicast group key management and updates.
\[[group_key](#group_key){.xref}\] states that when TKIP (WPA, now
deprecated) or AES-CCMP (WPA2/WPA3) encryption is in use, AP-to-client
(FromDS) multicasts have to be encrypted with a separate encryption key
that is known to all of the clients (this is called the Group Key).
Quoting further from that website, \"\... most clients are able to get
connected and surf the web, check email, etc. even when FromDS
multicasts are broken. So a lot of people don\'t realize they have
multicast problems on their network\...\"[¶](#section-9-3){.pilcrow}

This document encourages the use of proxy methods to conserve network
bandwidth and power utilization by low-power devices. Such proxy methods
in general have security considerations that require the proxy to be
trusted to not misbehave. One such proxy method listed is an ARP Sponge
that listens for ARP requests, and, if it sees an ARP for an IP address
that it believes is not used, it will reply with its own MAC address.
ARP poisoning and false advertising could potentially undermine (e.g.,
DoS) this and other proxy approaches.[¶](#section-9-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#iana}
::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-10-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-11 .section}
## [11.](#section-11){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[arpsponge\]
:   [Wessel, M.]{.refAuthor} and [N. Sijm]{.refAuthor}, [\"Effects of
    IPv4 and IPv6 address resolution on AMS-IX and the ARP
    Sponge\"]{.refTitle}, July 2009,
    \<<http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.182.4692>\>.
:   

\[bridge-mc-2-uc\]
:   [\"bridge: multicast to unicast\"]{.refTitle}, [commit
    6db6f0e]{.refContent}, January 2017,
    \<<https://github.com/torvalds/linux/commit/6db6f0e>\>.
:   

\[CAB\]
:   [\"limit multicast buffer hardware queue depth\"]{.refTitle},
    [commit 2687951]{.refContent}, June 2013,
    \<<https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2687951/>\>.
:   

\[Deri-2010\]
:   [Deri, L.]{.refAuthor} and [J. Gasparakis]{.refAuthor}, [\"10 Gbit
    Hardware Packet Filtering Using Commodity Network
    Adapters\"]{.refTitle}, [RIPE 61]{.refContent}, November 2010,
    \<<http://ripe61.ripe.net/presentations/138-Deri_RIPE_61.pdf>\>.
:   

\[dot11\]
:   [IEEE]{.refAuthor}, [\"Information Technology\--Telecommunications
    and Information Exchange between Systems - Local and Metropolitan
    Area Networks\--Specific Requirements - Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium
    Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications
    (includes 802.11v amendment)\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1109/IEEESTD.2021.9363693]{.seriesInfo}, [IEEE Std
    802.11-2020]{.seriesInfo}, December 2020,
    \<<https://standards.ieee.org/standard/802_11-2020.html>\>.
:   

\[dot11-proxyarp\]
:   [Hiertz, G.]{.refAuthor}, [Mestanov, F.]{.refAuthor}, and [B.
    Hart]{.refAuthor}, [\"Proxy ARP in 802.11ax\"]{.refTitle}, September
    2015,
    \<<https://mentor.ieee.org/802.11/dcn/15/11-15-1015-01-00ax-proxy-arp-in-802-11ax.pptx>\>.
:   

\[dot11aa\]
:   [IEEE]{.refAuthor}, [\"Information technology\--Telecommunications
    and information exchange between systems Local and metropolitan area
    networks\--Specific requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access
    Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications Amendment 2:
    MAC Enhancements for Robust Audio Video Streaming\"]{.refTitle},
    [DOI 10.1109/IEEESTD.2012.6204193]{.seriesInfo}, [IEEE Std
    802.11aa-2012]{.seriesInfo}, March 2012,
    \<<https://standards.ieee.org/standard/802_11aa-2012.html>\>.
:   

\[group_key\]
:   [\"Subject: Why do some WiFi routers block multicast packets going
    from wired to wireless?\"]{.refTitle}, [message to the Super User Q
    & A community]{.refContent}, January 2017,
    \<<https://superuser.com/questions/730288/why-do-some-wifi-routers-block-multicast-packets-going-from-wired-to-wireless>\>.
:   

\[IEEE802.1ak\]
:   [IEEE]{.refAuthor}, [\"Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Virtual
    Bridged Local Area Networks - Amendment 07: Multiple Registration
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1109/IEEESTD.2007.380667]{.seriesInfo}, [IEEE Std
    802.1ak-2007]{.seriesInfo}, June 2007,
    \<<https://www.ieee802.org/1/pages/802.1ak.html>\>.
:   

\[ietf_802-11\]
:   [Stanley, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"IEEE 802.11 multicast
    capabilities\"]{.refTitle}, November 2015,
    \<<https://mentor.ieee.org/802.11/dcn/15/11-15-1261-03-0arc-multicast-performance-optimization-features-overview-for-ietf-nov-2015.ppt>\>.
:   

\[mc-prob-stmt\]
:   [Abrahamsson, M.]{.refAuthor} and [A. Stephens]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Multicast on 802.11\"]{.refTitle}, 2013,
    \<<https://www.iab.org/wp-content/IAB-uploads/2013/01/multicast-problem-statement.pptx>\>.
:   

\[mc-props\]
:   [Stephens, A.]{.refAuthor}, [\"IEEE 802.11 multicast
    properties\"]{.refTitle}, September 2015,
    \<<https://mentor.ieee.org/802.11/dcn/15/11-15-1161-02-0arc-802-11-multicast-properties.ppt>\>.
:   

\[Oliva2013\]
:   [de la Oliva, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Serrano, P.]{.refAuthor},
    [Salvador, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [A. Banchs]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Performance evaluation of the IEEE 802.11aa multicast mechanisms
    for video streaming\"]{.refTitle}, [2013 IEEE 14th International
    Symposium on \"A World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks\"
    (WoWMoM), pp. 1-9 ]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/WoWMoM.2013.6583394]{.seriesInfo}, June 2013,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/WoWMoM.2013.6583394>\>.
:   

\[RFC0826\]
:   [Plummer, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"An Ethernet Address Resolution
    Protocol: Or Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit
    Ethernet Address for Transmission on Ethernet
    Hardware\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 37]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    826]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC0826]{.seriesInfo}, November
    1982, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc826>\>.
:   

\[RFC2131\]
:   [Droms, R.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Dynamic Host Configuration
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2131]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2131]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2131>\>.
:   

\[RFC4286\]
:   [Haberman, B.]{.refAuthor} and [J. Martin]{.refAuthor}, [\"Multicast
    Router Discovery\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4286]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4286]{.seriesInfo}, December 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4286>\>.
:   

\[RFC4541\]
:   [Christensen, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Kimball, K.]{.refAuthor}, and [F.
    Solensky]{.refAuthor}, [\"Considerations for Internet Group
    Management Protocol (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD)
    Snooping Switches\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4541]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4541]{.seriesInfo}, May 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4541>\>.
:   

\[RFC4601\]
:   [Fenner, B.]{.refAuthor}, [Handley, M.]{.refAuthor},
    [Holbrook, H.]{.refAuthor}, and [I. Kouvelas]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol
    Specification (Revised)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4601]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4601]{.seriesInfo}, August 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4601>\>.
:   

\[RFC4861\]
:   [Narten, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Nordmark, E.]{.refAuthor},
    [Simpson, W.]{.refAuthor}, and [H. Soliman]{.refAuthor}, [\"Neighbor
    Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4861]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4861]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2007, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4861>\>.
:   

\[RFC4862\]
:   [Thomson, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Narten, T.]{.refAuthor}, and [T.
    Jinmei]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6 Stateless Address
    Autoconfiguration\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4862]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4862]{.seriesInfo}, September 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4862>\>.
:   

\[RFC5757\]
:   [Schmidt, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Waehlisch, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [G.
    Fairhurst]{.refAuthor}, [\"Multicast Mobility in Mobile IP Version 6
    (MIPv6): Problem Statement and Brief Survey\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5757]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5757]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2010, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5757>\>.
:   

\[RFC5796\]
:   [Atwood, W.]{.refAuthor}, [Islam, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Siami]{.refAuthor}, [\"Authentication and Confidentiality in
    Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) Link-Local
    Messages\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5796]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5796]{.seriesInfo}, March 2010,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5796>\>.
:   

\[RFC6282\]
:   [Hui, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor} and [P. Thubert]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Compression Format for IPv6 Datagrams over IEEE 802.15.4-Based
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6282]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6282]{.seriesInfo}, September 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6282>\>.
:   

\[RFC6762\]
:   [Cheshire, S.]{.refAuthor} and [M. Krochmal]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Multicast DNS\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6762]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6762]{.seriesInfo}, February 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6762>\>.
:   

\[RFC6763\]
:   [Cheshire, S.]{.refAuthor} and [M. Krochmal]{.refAuthor},
    [\"DNS-Based Service Discovery\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6763]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6763]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2013, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6763>\>.
:   

\[RFC6775\]
:   [Shelby, Z., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Chakrabarti, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Nordmark, E.]{.refAuthor}, and [C. Bormann]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Neighbor Discovery Optimization for IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless
    Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6775]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6775]{.seriesInfo}, November
    2012, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6775>\>.
:   

\[RFC6970\]
:   [Boucadair, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Penno, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [D.
    Wing]{.refAuthor}, [\"Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) Internet
    Gateway Device - Port Control Protocol Interworking Function
    (IGD-PCP IWF)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6970]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6970]{.seriesInfo}, July 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6970>\>.
:   

\[RFC7450\]
:   [Bumgardner, G.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Automatic Multicast
    Tunneling\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7450]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7450]{.seriesInfo}, February 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7450>\>.
:   

\[RFC7761\]
:   [Fenner, B.]{.refAuthor}, [Handley, M.]{.refAuthor},
    [Holbrook, H.]{.refAuthor}, [Kouvelas, I.]{.refAuthor},
    [Parekh, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Zhang, Z.]{.refAuthor}, and [L.
    Zheng]{.refAuthor}, [\"Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode
    (PIM-SM): Protocol Specification (Revised)\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    83]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 7761]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7761]{.seriesInfo}, March 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7761>\>.
:   

\[RFC8415\]
:   [Mrugalski, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Siodelski, M.]{.refAuthor},
    [Volz, B.]{.refAuthor}, [Yourtchenko, A.]{.refAuthor},
    [Richardson, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Jiang, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Lemon, T.]{.refAuthor}, and [T. Winters]{.refAuthor}, [\"Dynamic
    Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8415]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8415]{.seriesInfo}, November
    2018, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8415>\>.
:   

\[RFC8505\]
:   [Thubert, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Nordmark, E.]{.refAuthor},
    [Chakrabarti, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [C. Perkins]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Registration Extensions for IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless Personal
    Area Network (6LoWPAN) Neighbor Discovery\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8505]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8505]{.seriesInfo}, November
    2018, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8505>\>.
:   

\[RFC8777\]
:   [Holland, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS Reverse IP Automatic Multicast
    Tunneling (AMT) Discovery\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8777]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC8777]{.seriesInfo}, April 2020,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8777>\>.
:   

\[RFC8929\]
:   [Thubert, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Perkins, C.E.]{.refAuthor}, and [E.
    Levy-Abegnoli]{.refAuthor}, [\"IPv6 Backbone Router\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 8929]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8929]{.seriesInfo},
    November 2020, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8929>\>.
:   

\[RFC9030\]
:   [Thubert, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"An Architecture for IPv6 over the
    Time-Slotted Channel Hopping Mode of IEEE 802.15.4
    (6TiSCH)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 9030]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC9030]{.seriesInfo}, May 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9030>\>.
:   

\[Tramarin2017\]
:   [Tramarin, F.]{.refAuthor}, [Vitturi, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Luvisotto]{.refAuthor}, [\"IEEE 802.11n for Distributed Measurement
    Systems\"]{.refTitle}, [2017 IEEE International Instrumentation and
    Measurement Technology Conference (I2MTC), pp. 1-6]{.refContent},
    May 2017.
:   

\[uli\]
:   [Kinney, P.]{.refAuthor}, [\"LLC Proposal for
    802.15.4\"]{.refTitle}, September 2015,
    \<<https://mentor.ieee.org/802.15/dcn/15/15-15-0521-01-wng0-llc-proposal-for-802-15-4.pptx>\>.
:   

\[v2011\]
:   [IEEE]{.refAuthor}, [\"Information technology \-- Local and
    metropolitan area networks \-- Specific requirements \-- Part 11:
    Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY)
    specifications Amendment 8: IEEE 802.11 Wireless Network
    Management\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1109/IEEESTD.2011.5716530]{.seriesInfo}, [IEEE Std
    802.11v-2011]{.seriesInfo}, February 2011,
    \<<https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5716530>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#acknowledgements}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

This document has benefitted from discussions with the following people,
in alphabetical order: [Mikael Abrahamsson]{.contact-name}, [Bill
Atwood]{.contact-name}, [Stuart Cheshire]{.contact-name}, [Donald
Eastlake 3rd]{.contact-name}, [Toerless Eckert]{.contact-name}, [Jake
Holland]{.contact-name}, [Joel Jaeggli]{.contact-name}, [Jan
Komissar]{.contact-name}, [David Lamparter]{.contact-name}, [Morten
Pedersen]{.contact-name}, [Pascal Thubert]{.contact-name}, and [Jeffrey
(Zhaohui) Zhang]{.contact-name}.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Charles E. Perkins]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Lupin Lodge]{.org}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+1 408 255 9223](tel:+1%20408%20255%209223){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <charliep@lupinlodge.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mike McBride]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Futurewei Technologies Inc.]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[2330 Central Expressway]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Santa Clara]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [95055]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <michael.mcbride@futurewei.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Dorothy Stanley]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Hewlett Packard Enterprise]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[6280 America Center Dr.]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[San Jose]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [95002]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+1 630 363 1389](tel:+1%20630%20363%201389){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <dorothy.stanley@hpe.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Warren Kumari]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Google]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[1600 Amphitheatre Parkway]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mountain View]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [94043]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <warren@kumari.net>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Juan Carlos Zúñiga]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[SIGFOX]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Montreal]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Canada]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <j.c.zuniga@ieee.org>
:::
:::
:::
