  RFC 9149        TLS Ticket Requests   April 2022
  --------------- --------------------- ------------
  Pauly, et al.   Standards Track       \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9149](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9149){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   April 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    T. Pauly
    :::

    ::: org
    Apple Inc.
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    D. Schinazi
    :::

    ::: org
    Google LLC
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    C.A. Wood
    :::

    ::: org
    Cloudflare
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9149 {#rfcnum}

# TLS Ticket Requests {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

TLS session tickets enable stateless connection resumption for clients
without server-side, per-client state. Servers vend an arbitrary number
of session tickets to clients, at their discretion, upon connection
establishment. Clients store and use tickets when resuming future
connections. This document describes a mechanism by which clients can
specify the desired number of tickets needed for future connections.
This extension aims to provide a means for servers to determine the
number of tickets to generate in order to reduce ticket waste while
simultaneously priming clients for future connection
attempts.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9149>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal
Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the Revised
BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1}
        [1.1](#section-1.1){.xref}.  [Requirements
        Language](#name-requirements-language){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Use Cases](#name-use-cases){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Ticket
    Requests](#name-ticket-requests){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Performance
    Considerations](#name-performance-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2}
        [7.2](#section-7.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-1}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

As described in \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\], TLS servers vend clients
an arbitrary number of session tickets at their own discretion in
NewSessionTicket messages. There are at least three limitations with
this design.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

First, servers vend some (often hard-coded) number of tickets per
connection. Some server implementations return a different default
number of tickets for session resumption than for the initial connection
that created the session. No static choice, whether fixed or dependent
upon resumption, is ideal for all situations.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

Second, clients do not have a way of expressing their desired number of
tickets, which can impact future connection establishment. For example,
clients can open parallel TLS connections to the same server for HTTP,
or they can race TLS connections across different network interfaces.
The latter is especially useful in transport systems that implement
Happy Eyeballs \[[RFC8305](#RFC8305){.xref}\]. Since clients control
connection concurrency and resumption, a standard mechanism for
requesting more than one ticket is desirable for avoiding ticket reuse.
See [Appendix
C.4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#appendix-C.4){.relref} of
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] for discussion of ticket reuse
risks.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Third, all tickets in the client\'s possession ultimately derive from
some initial connection. Especially when the client was initially
authenticated with a client certificate, that session may need to be
refreshed from time to time. Consequently, a server may periodically
force a new connection even when the client presents a valid ticket.
When that happens, it is possible that any other tickets derived from
the same original session are equally invalid. A client avoids a full
handshake on subsequent connections if it replaces all stored tickets
with new ones obtained from the just-performed full handshake. The
number of tickets the server should vend for a new connection may
therefore need to be larger than the number for routine
resumption.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

This document specifies a new TLS extension, \"ticket_request\", that
clients can use to express their desired number of session tickets.
Servers can use this extension as a hint for the number of
NewSessionTicket messages to vend. This extension is only applicable to
TLS 1.3 \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\], DTLS 1.3
\[[RFC9147](#RFC9147){.xref}\], and future versions of
(D)TLS.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

::: {#sect-1.1}
::: {#section-1.1 .section}
### [1.1.](#section-1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Requirements Language](#name-requirements-language){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-requirements-language}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-1.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-2}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Use Cases](#name-use-cases){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-use-cases}

The ability to request one or more tickets is useful for a variety of
purposes:[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Parallel HTTP connections:
:   To improve performance, a client may open parallel connections. To
    avoid ticket reuse, the client may use distinct tickets on each
    connection. Clients must therefore bound the number of parallel
    connections they initiate by the number of tickets in their
    possession or risk ticket reuse.[¶](#section-2-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Connection racing:
:   Happy Eyeballs V2 \[[RFC8305](#RFC8305){.xref}\] describes
    techniques for performing connection racing. The Transport Services
    Implementation document \[[TAPS](#I-D.ietf-taps-impl){.xref}\] also
    describes how connections can race across interfaces and address
    families. In such cases, clients may use more than one ticket while
    racing connection attempts in order to establish one successful
    connection. Having multiple tickets equips clients with enough
    tickets to initiate connection racing while avoiding ticket reuse
    and ensuring that their cache of tickets does not empty during such
    races. Moreover, as some servers may implement single-use tickets,
    distinct tickets prevent premature ticket invalidation by
    racing.[¶](#section-2-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Less ticket waste:
:   Currently, TLS servers use application-specific, and often
    implementation-specific, logic to determine how many tickets to
    issue. By moving the burden of ticket count to clients, servers do
    not generate wasteful tickets. As an example, clients might only
    request one ticket during resumption. Moreover, as ticket generation
    might involve expensive computation, e.g., public key cryptographic
    operations, avoiding waste is
    desirable.[¶](#section-2-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Decline resumption:
:   Clients can indicate they do not intend to resume a connection by
    sending a ticket request with count of
    zero.[¶](#section-2-2.8){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#sect-3}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Ticket Requests](#name-ticket-requests){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ticket-requests}

As discussed in [Section 1](#sect-1){.xref}, clients may want different
numbers of tickets for new or resumed connections. Clients may indicate
to servers their desired number of tickets to receive on a single
connection, in the case of a new or resumed connection, via the
following \"ticket_request\" extension:[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-3-2}
``` {.lang-tls-presentation .sourcecode}
enum {
    ticket_request(58), (65535)
} ExtensionType;
```

[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}
:::

Clients [MAY]{.bcp14} send this extension in ClientHello. It contains
the following structure:[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-3-4}
``` {.lang-tls-presentation .sourcecode}
struct {
    uint8 new_session_count;
    uint8 resumption_count;
} ClientTicketRequest;
```

[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}
:::

[]{.break}

new_session_count:
:   The number of tickets desired by the client if the server chooses to
    negotiate a new connection.[¶](#section-3-5.2){.pilcrow}
:   

resumption_count:
:   The number of tickets desired by the client if the server is willing
    to resume using a ticket presented in this
    ClientHello.[¶](#section-3-5.4){.pilcrow}
:   

A client starting a new connection [SHOULD]{.bcp14} set
new_session_count to the desired number of session tickets and
resumption_count to 0. Once a client\'s ticket cache is primed, a
resumption_count of 1 is a good choice that allows the server to replace
each ticket with a new ticket without over-provisioning the client with
excess tickets. However, clients that race multiple connections and
place a separate ticket in each will ultimately end up with just the
tickets from a single resumed session. In that case, clients can send a
resumption_count equal to the number of connections they are attempting
in parallel. (Clients that send a resumption_count less than the number
of parallel connection attempts might end up with zero
tickets.)[¶](#section-3-6){.pilcrow}

When a client presenting a previously obtained ticket finds that the
server nevertheless negotiates a new connection, the client
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} assume that any other tickets associated with the same
session as the presented ticket are also no longer valid for resumption.
This includes tickets obtained during the initial (new) connection and
all tickets subsequently obtained as part of subsequent resumptions.
Requesting more than one ticket when servers complete a new connection
helps keep the session cache primed.[¶](#section-3-7){.pilcrow}

Servers [SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14} send more tickets than requested for the
connection type selected by the server (new or resumed connection).
Moreover, servers [SHOULD]{.bcp14} place a limit on the number of
tickets they are willing to send, whether for new or resumed
connections, to save resources. Therefore, the number of
NewSessionTicket messages sent will typically be the minimum of the
server\'s self-imposed limit and the number requested. Servers
[MAY]{.bcp14} send additional tickets, typically using the same limit,
if the tickets that are originally sent are somehow
invalidated.[¶](#section-3-8){.pilcrow}

A server that supports and uses a client \"ticket_request\" extension
[MUST]{.bcp14} also send the \"ticket_request\" extension in the
EncryptedExtensions message. It contains the following
structure:[¶](#section-3-9){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-3-10}
``` {.lang-tls-presentation .sourcecode}
struct {
    uint8 expected_count;
} ServerTicketRequestHint;
```

[¶](#section-3-10){.pilcrow}
:::

[]{.break}

expected_count:
:   The number of tickets the server expects to send in this
    connection.[¶](#section-3-11.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Servers [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} send the \"ticket_request\" extension in any
handshake message, including ServerHello or HelloRetryRequest messages.
A client [MUST]{.bcp14} abort the connection with an
\"illegal_parameter\" alert if the \"ticket_request\" extension is
present in any server handshake message.[¶](#section-3-12){.pilcrow}

If a client receives a HelloRetryRequest, the presence (or absence) of
the \"ticket_request\" extension [MUST]{.bcp14} be maintained in the
second ClientHello message. Moreover, if this extension is present, a
client [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} change the value of ClientTicketRequest in the
second ClientHello message.[¶](#section-3-13){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-4}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has added the following entry to the \"TLS ExtensionType Values\"
registry \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8447](#RFC8447){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-addition-to-tls-extensionty}

::: {#iana_table}
  Value   Extension Name   TLS 1.3   DTLS-Only   Recommended
  ------- ---------------- --------- ----------- -------------
  58      ticket_request   CH, EE    N           Y

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [Addition to TLS ExtensionType Values
  Registry](#name-addition-to-tls-extensionty){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-5}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Performance Considerations](#name-performance-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-performance-considerations}

Servers can send tickets in NewSessionTicket messages any time after the
server Finished message (see [Section
4.6.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-4.6.1){.relref} of
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]). A server that chooses to send a large
number of tickets to a client can potentially harm application
performance if the tickets are sent before application data. For
example, if the transport connection has a constrained congestion
window, ticket messages could delay sending application data. To avoid
this, servers should prioritize sending application data over tickets
when possible.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-6}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

Ticket reuse is a security and privacy concern. Moreover, clients must
take care when pooling tickets as a means of avoiding or amortizing
handshake costs. If servers do not rotate session ticket encryption keys
frequently, clients may be encouraged to obtain and use tickets beyond
common lifetime windows of, e.g., 24 hours. Despite ticket lifetime
hints provided by servers, clients [SHOULD]{.bcp14} dispose of cached
tickets after some reasonable amount of time that mimics the session
ticket encryption key rotation period. Specifically, as specified in
[Section
4.6.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-4.6.1){.relref} of
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\], clients [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} cache tickets
for longer than 7 days.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

In some cases, a server may send NewSessionTicket messages immediately
upon sending the server Finished message rather than waiting for the
client Finished message. If the server has not verified the client\'s
ownership of its IP address, e.g., with the TLS cookie extension (see
[Section
4.2.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-4.2.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]), an attacker may take advantage of this
behavior to create an amplification attack proportional to the count
value toward a target by performing a (DTLS) key exchange over UDP with
spoofed packets. Servers [SHOULD]{.bcp14} limit the number of
NewSessionTicket messages they send until they have verified the
client\'s ownership of its IP address.[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

Servers that do not enforce a limit on the number of NewSessionTicket
messages sent in response to a \"ticket_request\" extension could leave
themselves open to DoS attacks, especially if ticket creation is
expensive.[¶](#section-6-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8446\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Transport Layer Security (TLS)
    Protocol Version 1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8446]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8446]{.seriesInfo}, August 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8446>\>.
:   

\[RFC8447\]
:   [Salowey, J.]{.refAuthor} and [S. Turner]{.refAuthor}, [\"IANA
    Registry Updates for TLS and DTLS\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8447]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8447]{.seriesInfo}, August
    2018, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8447>\>.
:   

\[RFC9147\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}, [Tschofenig, H.]{.refAuthor}, and [N.
    Modadugu]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Datagram Transport Layer Security
    (DTLS) Protocol Version 1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 9147]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC9147]{.seriesInfo}, April 2022,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9147>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-7.2 .section}
### [7.2.](#section-7.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC8305\]
:   [Schinazi, D.]{.refAuthor} and [T. Pauly]{.refAuthor}, [\"Happy
    Eyeballs Version 2: Better Connectivity Using
    Concurrency\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8305]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8305]{.seriesInfo}, December 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8305>\>.
:   

\[TAPS\]
:   [Brunstrom, A., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Pauly, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [Enghardt, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Tiesel, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Welzl]{.refAuthor}, [\"Implementing Interfaces to Transport
    Services\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-taps-impl-12]{.seriesInfo}, 7 March
    2022,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-taps-impl-12>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#sect-7}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

The authors would like to thank [David Benjamin]{.contact-name}, [Eric
Rescorla]{.contact-name}, [Nick Sullivan]{.contact-name}, [Martin
Thomson]{.contact-name}, [Hubert Kario]{.contact-name}, and other
members of the TLS Working Group for discussions on earlier draft
versions of this document. [Viktor Dukhovni]{.contact-name} contributed
text allowing clients to send multiple counts in a ticket
request.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Tommy Pauly]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Apple Inc.]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[One Apple Park Way]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cupertino]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [95014]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <tpauly@apple.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[David Schinazi]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Google LLC]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[1600 Amphitheatre Parkway]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mountain View]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [94043]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <dschinazi.ietf@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Christopher A. Wood]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cloudflare]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[101 Townsend St]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[San Francisco]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [94107]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <caw@heapingbits.net>
:::
:::
:::
