  RFC 9150              HMAC-Only Ciphers   April 2022
  --------------------- ------------------- ------------
  Cam-Winget & Visoky   Informational       \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Independent Submission

RFC:
:   [9150](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9150){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   April 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    N. Cam-Winget
    :::

    ::: org
    Cisco Systems
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Visoky
    :::

    ::: org
    ODVA
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9150 {#rfcnum}

# TLS 1.3 Authentication and Integrity-Only Cipher Suites {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document defines the use of cipher suites for TLS 1.3 based on
Hashed Message Authentication Code (HMAC). Using these cipher suites
provides server and, optionally, mutual authentication and data
authenticity, but not data confidentiality. Cipher suites with these
properties are not of general applicability, but there are use cases,
specifically in Internet of Things (IoT) and constrained environments,
that do not require confidentiality of exchanged messages while still
requiring integrity protection, server authentication, and optional
client authentication. This document gives examples of such use cases,
with the caveat that prior to using these integrity-only cipher suites,
a threat model for the situation at hand is needed, and a threat
analysis must be performed within that model to determine whether the
use of integrity-only cipher suites is appropriate. The approach
described in this document is not endorsed by the IETF and does not have
IETF consensus, but it is presented here to enable interoperable
implementation of a reduced-security mechanism that provides
authentication and message integrity without supporting
confidentiality.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This is a contribution to the RFC Series, independently of any other RFC
stream. The RFC Editor has chosen to publish this document at its
discretion and makes no statement about its value for implementation or
deployment. Documents approved for publication by the RFC Editor are not
candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9150>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Applicability
    Statement](#name-applicability-statement){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Cryptographic Negotiation Using
    Integrity-Only Cipher
    Suites](#name-cryptographic-negotiation-u){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Record Payload Protection for
    Integrity-Only Cipher
    Suites](#name-record-payload-protection-f){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Key Schedule when Using Integrity-Only
    Cipher Suites](#name-key-schedule-when-using-int){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Error Alerts](#name-error-alerts){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Security and Privacy
    Considerations](#name-security-and-privacy-consid){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.1}
        [10.1](#section-10.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10.2.2}
        [10.2](#section-10.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

There are several use cases in which communications privacy is not
strictly needed, although authenticity of the communications transport
is still very important. For example, within the industrial automation
space, there could be TCP or UDP communications that command a robotic
arm to move a certain distance at a certain speed. Without authenticity
guarantees, an attacker could modify the packets to change the movement
of the robotic arm, potentially causing physical damage. However, the
motion control commands are not always considered to be sensitive
information, and thus there is no requirement to provide
confidentiality. Another Internet of Things (IoT) example with no strong
requirement for confidentiality is the reporting of weather information;
however, message authenticity is required to ensure integrity of the
message.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

There is no requirement to encrypt messages in environments where the
information is not confidential, such as when there is no intellectual
property associated with the processes, or where the threat model does
not indicate any outsider attacks (such as in a closed system). Note,
however, that this situation will not apply equally to all use cases
(for example, in one case a robotic arm might be used for a process that
does not involve any intellectual property but in another case might be
used in a different process that does contain intellectual property).
Therefore, it is important that a user or system developer carefully
examine both the sensitivity of the data and the system threat model to
determine the need for encryption before deploying equipment and
security protections.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

Besides having a strong need for authenticity and no need for
confidentiality, many of these systems also have a strong requirement
for low latency. Furthermore, several classes of IoT devices (industrial
or otherwise) have limited processing capability. However, these IoT
systems still gain great benefit from leveraging TLS 1.3 for secure
communications. Given the reduced need for confidentiality, TLS 1.3
cipher suites \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] that maintain data
integrity without confidentiality are described in this document. These
cipher suites are not meant for general use, as they do not meet the
confidentiality and privacy goals of TLS. They should only be used in
cases where confidentiality and privacy are not a concern and there are
constraints on using cipher suites that provide the full set of security
properties. The approach described in this document is not endorsed by
the IETF and does not have IETF consensus, but it is presented here to
enable interoperable implementation of a reduced-security mechanism that
provides authentication and message integrity with supporting
confidentiality.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

This document adopts the conventions for normative language to provide
clarity of instructions to the implementer. The key words
\"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\", \"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\", \"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT
RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in
this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
\[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\] \[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and
only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown
here.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Applicability Statement](#name-applicability-statement){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-applicability-statement}

The two cipher suites defined in this document, which are based on
Hashed Message Authentication Code (HMAC) SHAs
\[[RFC6234](#RFC6234){.xref}\], are intended for a small limited set of
applications where confidentiality requirements are relaxed and the need
to minimize the number of cryptographic algorithms is prioritized. This
section describes some of those applicable use
cases.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

Use cases in the industrial automation industry, while requiring data
integrity, often do not require confidential communications. Mainly,
data communicated to unmanned machines to execute repetitive tasks does
not convey private information. For example, there could be a system
with a robotic arm that paints the body of a car. This equipment is used
within a car manufacturing plant and is just one piece of equipment in a
multi-step manufacturing process. The movements of this robotic arm are
likely not a trade secret or sensitive intellectual property, although
some portions of the manufacturing of the car might very well contain
sensitive intellectual property. Even the mixture for the paint itself
might be confidential, but the mixing is done by a completely different
piece of equipment and therefore communication to/from that equipment
can be encrypted without requiring the communication to/from the robotic
arm to be encrypted. Modern manufacturing often has segmented equipment
with different levels of risk related to intellectual property, although
nearly every communication interaction has strong data authenticity
requirements.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

Another use case that is closely related is that of fine-grained time
updates. Motion systems often rely on time synchronization to ensure
proper execution. Time updates are essentially public; there is no
threat from an attacker knowing the time update information. This should
make intuitive sense to those not familiar with these applications;
rarely if ever does time information present a serious attack surface
dealing with privacy. However, the authenticity is still quite
important. The consequences of maliciously modified time data can vary
from mere denial of service to actual physical damage, depending on the
particular situation and attacker capability. As these time
synchronization updates are very fine-grained, it is again important for
latency to be very low.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

A third use case deals with data related to alarms. Industrial control
sensing equipment can be configured to send alarm information when it
meets certain conditions \-- for example, temperature goes above or
below a given threshold. Oftentimes, this data is used to detect certain
out-of-tolerance conditions, allowing an operator or automated system to
take corrective action. Once again, in many systems the reading of this
data doesn\'t grant the attacker information that can be exploited; it
is generally just information regarding the physical state of the
system. At the same time, being able to modify this data would allow an
attacker to either trigger alarms falsely or cover up evidence of an
attack that might allow for detection of their malicious activity.
Furthermore, sensors are often low-powered devices that might struggle
to process encrypted and authenticated data. These sensors might be very
cost sensitive such that there is not enough processing power for data
encryption. Sending data that is just authenticated but not encrypted
eases the burden placed on these devices yet still allows the data to be
protected against any tampering threats. A user can always choose to pay
more for a sensor with encryption capability, but for some, data
authenticity will be sufficient.[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}

A fourth use case considers the protection of commands in the railway
industry. In railway control systems, no confidentiality requirements
are applied for the command exchange between an interlocking controller
and a railway equipment controller (for instance, a railway point
controller of a tram track where the position of the controlled point is
publicly available). However, protecting the integrity and authenticity
of those commands is vital; otherwise, an adversary could change the
target position of the point by modifying the commands, which
consequently could lead to the derailment of a passing train.
Furthermore, requirements for providing flight-data recording of the
safety-related network traffic can only be fulfilled through using
authenticity-only ciphers as, typically, the recording is used by a
third party responsible for the analysis after an accident. The analysis
requires such third party to extract the safety-related commands from
the recording.[¶](#section-3-5){.pilcrow}

The fifth use case deals with data related to civil aviation airplanes
and ground communication. Pilots can send and receive messages to/from
ground control, such as airplane route-of-flight updates, weather
information, controller and pilot communication, and airline back-office
communication. Similarly, the Air Traffic Control (ATC) service uses
air-to-ground communication to receive the surveillance data that relies
on (is dependent on) downlink reports from an airplane\'s avionics. This
communication occurs automatically in accordance with contracts
established between the ATC ground system and the airplane\'s avionics.
Reports can be sent whenever specific events occur or specific time
intervals are reached. In many systems, the reading of this data
doesn\'t grant the attacker information that can be exploited; it is
generally just information regarding the states of the airplane,
controller pilot communication, meteorological information, etc. At the
same time, being able to modify this data would allow an attacker to
either put aircraft in the wrong flight trajectory or provide false
information to ground control that might delay flights, damage property,
or harm life. Sending data that is not encrypted but is authenticated
allows the data to be protected against any tampering threats. Data
authenticity is sufficient for the air traffic, weather, and
surveillance information exchanges between airplanes and the ground
systems.[¶](#section-3-6){.pilcrow}

The above use cases describe the requirements where confidentiality is
not needed and/or interferes with other requirements. Some of these use
cases are based on devices that come with a small runtime memory
footprint and reduced processing power; therefore, the need to minimize
the number of cryptographic algorithms used is a priority. Despite this,
it is noted that memory, performance, and processing power implications
of any given algorithm or set of algorithms are highly dependent on
hardware and software architecture. Therefore, although these cipher
suites may provide performance benefits, they will not necessarily
provide these benefits in all cases on all platforms. Furthermore, in
some use cases, third-party inspection of data is specifically needed,
which is also supported through the lack of confidentiality
mechanisms.[¶](#section-3-7){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Cryptographic Negotiation Using Integrity-Only Cipher Suites](#name-cryptographic-negotiation-u){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-cryptographic-negotiation-u}

The cryptographic negotiation as specified in
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\], [Section
4.1.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-4.1.1){.relref}
remains the same, with the inclusion of the following cipher
suites:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

-   [TLS_SHA256_SHA256
    {0xC0,0xB4}[¶](#section-4-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.1}
-   [TLS_SHA384_SHA384
    {0xC0,0xB5}[¶](#section-4-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.2}

As defined in \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\], TLS 1.3 cipher suites
denote the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD)
algorithm for record protection and the hash algorithm to use with the
HMAC-based Key Derivation Function (HKDF). The cipher suites provided by
this document are defined in a similar way, but they use the HMAC
authentication tag to model the AEAD interface, as only an HMAC is
provided for record protection (without encryption). These cipher suites
allow the use of SHA-256 or SHA-384 as the HMAC for data integrity
protection as well as its use for the HKDF. The authentication
mechanisms remain unchanged with the intent to only update the cipher
suites to relax the need for confidentiality.[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}

Given that these cipher suites do not support confidentiality, they
[MUST NOT]{.bcp14} be used with authentication and key exchange methods
that rely on confidentiality.[¶](#section-4-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Record Payload Protection for Integrity-Only Cipher Suites](#name-record-payload-protection-f){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-record-payload-protection-f}

Record payload protection as defined in \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]
is retained in modified form when integrity-only cipher suites are used.
Note that due to the purposeful use of hash algorithms, instead of AEAD
algorithms, confidentiality protection of the record payload is not
provided. This section describes the mapping of record payload
structures when integrity-only cipher suites are
employed.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

Given that there is no encryption to be done at the record layer, the
operations \"Protect\" and \"Unprotect\" take the place of
\"AEAD-Encrypt\" and \"AEAD-Decrypt\" \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\],
respectively.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}

As integrity protection is provided over the full record, the
encrypted_record in the TLSCiphertext along with the additional_data
input to protected_data (termed AEADEncrypted data in
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]) as defined in [Section
5.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-5.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] remain the same. The TLSCiphertext.length
for the integrity cipher suites will be:[¶](#section-5-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5-4 .alignLeft .art-text .artwork}
    TLS_SHA256_SHA256:
       TLSCiphertext.length = TLSInnerPlaintext_length + 32

    TLS_SHA384_SHA384:
       TLSCiphertext.length = TLSInnerPlaintext_length + 48

[¶](#section-5-4){.pilcrow}
:::

Note that TLSInnerPlaintext_length is not defined as an explicit field
in \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]; this refers to the length of the
encoded TLSInnerPlaintext structure.[¶](#section-5-5){.pilcrow}

The resulting protected_record is the concatenation of the
TLSInnerPlaintext with the resulting HMAC. Note that this is analogous
to the \"encrypted_record\" as defined in
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\], although it is referred to as a
\"protected_record\" because of the lack of confidentiality via
encryption. With this mapping, the record validation order as defined in
[Section
5.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-5.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] remains the same. That is, the
encrypted_record field of TLSCiphertext is set
to:[¶](#section-5-6){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5-7 .alignLeft .art-text .artwork}
       encrypted_record = TLS13-HMAC-Protected = TLSInnerPlaintext ||
       HMAC(write_key, nonce || additional_data || TLSInnerPlaintext)

[¶](#section-5-7){.pilcrow}
:::

Here, \"nonce\" refers to the per-record nonce described in [Section
5.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-5.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-8){.pilcrow}

For DTLS 1.3, the DTLSCiphertext is set to:[¶](#section-5-9){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5-10 .alignLeft .art-text .artwork}
       encrypted_record = DTLS13-HMAC-Protected = DTLSInnerPlaintext ||
       HMAC(write_key, nonce || additional_data || DTLSInnerPlaintext)

[¶](#section-5-10){.pilcrow}
:::

The DTLS \"nonce\" refers to the per-record nonce described in [Section
4.2.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9147#section-4.2.2){.relref} of
\[[DTLS13](#RFC9147){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-11){.pilcrow}

The Protect and Unprotect operations provide the integrity protection
using HMAC SHA-256 or HMAC SHA-384 as described in
\[[RFC6234](#RFC6234){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-12){.pilcrow}

Due to the lack of encryption of the plaintext, record padding does not
provide any obfuscation as to the plaintext size, although it can be
optionally included.[¶](#section-5-13){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Key Schedule when Using Integrity-Only Cipher Suites](#name-key-schedule-when-using-int){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-key-schedule-when-using-int}

The key derivation process for integrity-only cipher suites remains the
same as that defined in \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]. The only
difference is that the keys used to protect the tunnel apply to the
negotiated HMAC SHA-256 or HMAC SHA-384 ciphers. Note that the traffic
key material (client_write_key, client_write_iv, server_write_key, and
server_write_iv) [MUST]{.bcp14} be calculated as per
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\], [Section
7.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-7.3){.relref}. The
key lengths and Initialization Vectors (IVs) for these cipher suites are
according to the hash output lengths. In other words, the following key
lengths and IV lengths [SHALL]{.bcp14} be:[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

  Cipher Suite        Key Length   IV Length
  ------------------- ------------ -----------
  TLS_SHA256_SHA256   32 Bytes     32 Bytes
  TLS_SHA384_SHA384   48 Bytes     48 Bytes

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Error Alerts](#name-error-alerts){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-error-alerts}

The error alerts as defined by \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] remain the
same; in particular:[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

bad_record_mac:
:   This alert can also occur for a record whose message authentication
    code cannot be validated. Since these cipher suites do not involve
    record encryption, this alert will only occur when the HMAC fails to
    verify.[¶](#section-7-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

decrypt_error:
:   This alert, as described in \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\], [Section
    6.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-6.2){.relref},
    occurs when the signature or message authentication code cannot be
    validated. Note that this error is only sent during the handshake,
    not for an error in validating record
    HMACs.[¶](#section-7-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has registered the following cipher suites, defined by this
document, in the \"TLS Cipher Suites\"
registry:[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#iana_table}
  Value       Description         DTLS-OK   Recommended
  ----------- ------------------- --------- -------------
  0xC0,0xB4   TLS_SHA256_SHA256   Y         N
  0xC0,0xB5   TLS_SHA384_SHA384   Y         N

  : [Table 2](#table-2){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Security and Privacy Considerations](#name-security-and-privacy-consid){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-and-privacy-consid}

In general, except for confidentiality and privacy, the security
considerations detailed in \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] and
\[[RFC5246](#RFC5246){.xref}\] apply to this document. Furthermore, as
the cipher suites described in this document do not provide any
confidentiality, it is important that they only be used in cases where
there are no confidentiality or privacy requirements and concerns; the
runtime memory requirements can accommodate support for
authenticity-only cryptographic constructs.[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

With the lack of data encryption specified in this specification, no
confidentiality or privacy is provided for the data transported via the
TLS session. That is, the record layer is not encrypted when using these
cipher suites, nor is the handshake. To highlight the loss of privacy,
the information carried in the TLS handshake, which includes both the
server and client certificates, while integrity protected, will be sent
unencrypted. Similarly, other TLS extensions that may be carried in the
server\'s EncryptedExtensions message will only be integrity protected
without provisions for confidentiality. Furthermore, with this lack of
confidentiality, any private Pre-Shared Key (PSK) data [MUST
NOT]{.bcp14} be sent in the handshake while using these cipher suites.
However, as PSKs may be loaded externally, these cipher suites can be
used with the 0-RTT handshake defined in \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\],
with the same security implications discussed therein
applied.[¶](#section-9-2){.pilcrow}

Application protocols that build on TLS or DTLS for protection (e.g.,
HTTP) may have implicit assumptions of data confidentiality. Any
assumption of data confidentiality is invalidated by the use of these
cipher suites, as no data confidentiality is provided. This applies to
any data sent over the application-data channel (e.g., bearer tokens in
HTTP), as data requiring confidentiality [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} be sent
using these cipher suites.[¶](#section-9-3){.pilcrow}

Limits on key usage for AEAD-based ciphers are described in
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]. However, as the cipher suites discussed
here are not AEAD, those same limits do not apply. The general security
properties of HMACs discussed in \[[RFC2104](#RFC2104){.xref}\] and
\[[BCK1](#BCK1){.xref}\] apply. Additionally, security considerations on
the algorithm\'s strength based on the HMAC key length and truncation
length further described in \[[RFC4868](#RFC4868){.xref}\] also apply.
Until further cryptanalysis demonstrates limitations on key usage for
HMACs, general practice for key usage recommends that implementations
place limits on the lifetime of the HMAC keys and invoke a key update as
described in \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] prior to reaching this
limit.[¶](#section-9-4){.pilcrow}

DTLS 1.3 defines a mechanism for encrypting the DTLS record sequence
numbers. However, as these cipher suites do not utilize encryption, the
record sequence numbers are sent unencrypted. That is, the procedure for
DTLS record sequence number protection is to apply no protection for
these cipher suites.[¶](#section-9-5){.pilcrow}

Given the lack of confidentiality, these cipher suites [MUST
NOT]{.bcp14} be enabled by default. As these cipher suites are meant to
serve the IoT market, it is important that any IoT endpoint that uses
them be explicitly configured with a policy of non-confidential
communications.[¶](#section-9-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-10.1 .section}
### [10.1.](#section-10.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[BCK1\]
:   [Bellare, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Canetti, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [H.
    Krawczyk]{.refAuthor}, [\"Keying Hash Functions for Message
    Authentication\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1007/3-540-68697-5_1]{.seriesInfo}, 1996,
    \<<https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/3-540-68697-5_1>\>.
:   

\[DTLS13\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}, [Tschofenig, H.]{.refAuthor}, and [N.
    Modadugu]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Datagram Transport Layer Security
    (DTLS) Protocol Version 1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 9147]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC9147]{.seriesInfo}, April 2022,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9147>\>.
:   

\[RFC2104\]
:   [Krawczyk, H.]{.refAuthor}, [Bellare, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [R.
    Canetti]{.refAuthor}, [\"HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for Message
    Authentication\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2104]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC2104]{.seriesInfo}, February 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2104>\>.
:   

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC4868\]
:   [Kelly, S.]{.refAuthor} and [S. Frankel]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using
    HMAC-SHA-256, HMAC-SHA-384, and HMAC-SHA-512 with
    IPsec\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4868]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4868]{.seriesInfo}, May 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4868>\>.
:   

\[RFC6234\]
:   [Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor} and [T. Hansen]{.refAuthor}, [\"US
    Secure Hash Algorithms (SHA and SHA-based HMAC and
    HKDF)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6234]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6234]{.seriesInfo}, May 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6234>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8446\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Transport Layer Security (TLS)
    Protocol Version 1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8446]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8446]{.seriesInfo}, August 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8446>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-10.2 .section}
### [10.2.](#section-10.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC5246\]
:   [Dierks, T.]{.refAuthor} and [E. Rescorla]{.refAuthor}, [\"The
    Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 5246]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5246]{.seriesInfo}, August
    2008, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5246>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#Acknowledgements}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

The authors would like to acknowledge the work done by Industrial
Communications Standards Groups (such as ODVA) as the motivation for
this document. We would also like to thank [Steffen
Fries]{.contact-name} for providing a fourth use case and [Madhu
Niraula]{.contact-name} for a fifth use case. In addition, we are
grateful for the advice and feedback from [Joe Salowey]{.contact-name},
[Blake Anderson]{.contact-name}, [David McGrew]{.contact-name}, [Clement
Zeller]{.contact-name}, and [Peter
Wu]{.contact-name}.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Nancy Cam-Winget]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Cisco Systems]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[3550 Cisco Way]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[San Jose]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [95134]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <ncamwing@cisco.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jack Visoky]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[ODVA]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[1 Allen Bradley Dr]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mayfield Heights]{.locality}, [OH]{.region} [44124]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <jmvisoky@ra.rockwell.com>
:::
:::
:::
