  RFC 9156             QNAME Minimisation   November 2021
  -------------------- -------------------- ---------------
  Bortzmeyer, et al.   Standards Track      \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9156](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9156){.eref}

Obsoletes:
:   [7816](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7816){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   November 2021

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Bortzmeyer
    :::

    ::: org
    AFNIC
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    R. Dolmans
    :::

    ::: org
    NLnet Labs
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    P. Hoffman
    :::

    ::: org
    ICANN
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9156 {#rfcnum}

# DNS Query Name Minimisation to Improve Privacy {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document describes a technique called \"QNAME minimisation\" to
improve DNS privacy, where the DNS resolver no longer always sends the
full original QNAME and original QTYPE to the upstream name server. This
document obsoletes RFC 7816.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9156>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal
Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the Revised
BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction and
    Background](#name-introduction-and-background){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1}
        [1.1](#section-1.1){.xref}.  [Experience from RFC
        7816](#name-experience-from-rfc-7816){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.2}
        [1.2](#section-1.2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Description of QNAME
    Minimisation](#name-description-of-qname-minimi){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1}
        [2.1](#section-2.1){.xref}.  [QTYPE
        Selection](#name-qtype-selection){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2}
        [2.2](#section-2.2){.xref}.  [QNAME
        Selection](#name-qname-selection){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.3}
        [2.3](#section-2.3){.xref}.  [Limitation of the Number of
        Queries](#name-limitation-of-the-number-of){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.4}
        [2.4](#section-2.4){.xref}.  [Implementation by Stub and
        Forwarding Resolvers](#name-implementation-by-stub-and-){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Algorithm to Perform QNAME
    Minimisation](#name-algorithm-to-perform-qname-){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [QNAME Minimisation
    Examples](#name-qname-minimisation-examples){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Performance
    Considerations](#name-performance-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2}
        [7.2](#section-7.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#intro}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction and Background](#name-introduction-and-background){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction-and-background}

The problem statement for this document is described in
\[[RFC9076](#RFC9076){.xref}\]. This specific solution is not intended
to fully solve the DNS privacy problem; instead, it should be viewed as
one tool amongst many.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

QNAME minimisation follows the principle explained in [Section
6.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6973#section-6.1){.relref} of
\[[RFC6973](#RFC6973){.xref}\]: the less data you send out, the fewer
privacy problems you have.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

Before QNAME minimisation, when a resolver received the query \"What is
the AAAA record for www.example.com?\", it sent to the root (assuming a
resolver, whose cache is empty) the very same question. Sending the full
QNAME to the authoritative name server was a tradition, not a protocol
requirement. In a conversation with one of the authors in January 2015,
Paul Mockapetris explained that this tradition comes from a desire to
optimise the number of requests, when the same name server is
authoritative for many zones in a given name (something that was more
common in the old days, where the same name servers served .com and the
root) or when the same name server is both recursive and authoritative
(something that is strongly discouraged now). Whatever the merits of
this choice at this time, the DNS is quite different
now.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

QNAME minimisation is compatible with the current DNS system and
therefore can easily be deployed. Because it is only a change to the way
that the resolver operates, it does not change the DNS protocol itself.
The behaviour suggested here (minimising the amount of data sent in
QNAMEs from the resolver) is allowed by [Section
5.3.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1034#section-5.3.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC1034](#RFC1034){.xref}\] and [Section
7.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1035#section-7.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC1035](#RFC1035){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-1.1 .section}
### [1.1.](#section-1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Experience from RFC 7816](#name-experience-from-rfc-7816){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-experience-from-rfc-7816}

This document obsoletes \[[RFC7816](#RFC7816){.xref}\].
\[[RFC7816](#RFC7816){.xref}\] was categorised \"Experimental\", but
ideas from it were widely deployed since its publication. Many resolver
implementations now support QNAME minimisation. The lessons learned from
implementing QNAME minimisation were used to create this new
revision.[¶](#section-1.1-1){.pilcrow}

Data from DNSThought
\[[dnsthought-qnamemin](#dnsthought-qnamemin){.xref}\], Verisign
\[[verisign-qnamemin](#verisign-qnamemin){.xref}\], and APNIC
\[[apnic-qnamemin](#apnic-qnamemin){.xref}\] shows that a large
percentage of the resolvers deployed on the Internet already support
QNAME minimisation in some way.[¶](#section-1.1-2){.pilcrow}

Academic research has been performed on QNAME minimisation
\[[devries-qnamemin](#devries-qnamemin){.xref}\]. This work shows that
QNAME minimisation in relaxed mode causes almost no problems. The paper
recommends using the A QTYPE and limiting the number of queries in some
way. Some of the issues that the paper found are covered in [Section
5](#perf_cons){.xref}.[¶](#section-1.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-1.2 .section}
### [1.2.](#section-1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

The terminology used in this document is defined in
\[[RFC8499](#RFC8499){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1.2-1){.pilcrow}

In this document, a \"cold\" cache is one that is empty, having
literally no entries in it. A \"warm\" cache is one that has some
entries in it.[¶](#section-1.2-2){.pilcrow}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-1.2-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#qname-main}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Description of QNAME Minimisation](#name-description-of-qname-minimi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-description-of-qname-minimi}

The idea behind QNAME minimisation is to minimise the amount of
privacy-sensitive data sent from the DNS resolver to the authoritative
name server. This section describes how to do QNAME minimisation. The
algorithm is summarised in [Section
3](#zonecutalgo){.xref}.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

When a resolver is not able to answer a query from cache, it has to send
a query to an authoritative name server. Traditionally, these queries
would contain the full QNAME and the original QTYPE as received in the
client query.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

The full QNAME and original QTYPE are only needed at the name server
that is authoritative for the record requested by the client. All other
name servers queried while resolving the query only need to receive
enough of the QNAME to be able to answer with a delegation. The QTYPE in
these queries is not relevant, as the name server is not able to
authoritatively answer the records the client is looking for. Sending
the full QNAME and original QTYPE to these name servers therefore
exposes more privacy-sensitive data than necessary to resolve the
client\'s request.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

A resolver that implements QNAME minimisation obscures the QNAME and
QTYPE in queries directed to an authoritative name server that is not
known to be responsible for the original QNAME. These queries
contain:[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

-   [a QTYPE selected by the resolver to possibly obscure the original
    QTYPE[¶](#section-2-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-5.1}
-   [the QNAME that is the original QNAME, stripped to just one label
    more than the longest matching domain name for which the name server
    is known to be
    authoritative[¶](#section-2-5.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-5.2}

::: {#section-2.1 .section}
### [2.1.](#section-2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [QTYPE Selection](#name-qtype-selection){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-qtype-selection}

Note that this document relaxes the recommendation in
\[[RFC7816](#RFC7816){.xref}\] to use the NS QTYPE to hide the original
QTYPE. Using the NS QTYPE is still allowed. The authority of NS records
lies at the child side. The parent side of the delegation will answer
using a referral, like it will do for queries with other QTYPEs. Using
the NS QTYPE therefore has no added value over other
QTYPEs.[¶](#section-2.1-1){.pilcrow}

The QTYPE to use while minimising queries can be any possible data type
(as defined in [Section
3.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6895#section-3.1){.relref} of
\[[RFC6895](#RFC6895){.xref}\]) for which the authority always lies
below the zone cut (i.e., not DS, NSEC, NSEC3, OPT, TSIG, TKEY, ANY,
MAILA, MAILB, AXFR, and IXFR), as long as there is no relation between
the incoming QTYPE and the selection of the QTYPE to use while
minimising. The A or AAAA QTYPEs are always good candidates to use
because these are the least likely to raise issues in DNS software and
middleboxes that do not properly support all QTYPEs. QTYPE=A or
QTYPE=AAAA queries will also blend into traffic from nonminimising
resolvers, making it in some cases harder to observe that the resolver
is using QNAME minimisation. Using a QTYPE that occurs most in incoming
queries will slightly reduce the number of queries, as there is no extra
check needed for delegations on non-apex
records.[¶](#section-2.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2.2 .section}
### [2.2.](#section-2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [QNAME Selection](#name-qname-selection){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-qname-selection}

The minimising resolver works perfectly when it knows the zone cut (zone
cuts are described in [Section
6](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2181#section-6){.relref} of
\[[RFC2181](#RFC2181){.xref}\]). But zone cuts do not necessarily exist
at every label boundary. In the name www.foo.bar.example, it is possible
that there is a zone cut between \"foo\" and \"bar\" but not between
\"bar\" and \"example\". So, assuming that the resolver already knows
the name servers of example, when it receives the query \"What is the
AAAA record of www.foo.bar.example?\", it does not always know where the
zone cut will be. To find the zone cut, it will query the example name
servers for a record for bar.example. It will get a non-referral answer,
so it has to query the example name servers again with one more label,
and so on. ([Section 3](#zonecutalgo){.xref} describes this algorithm in
deeper detail.)[¶](#section-2.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#number-of-queries}
::: {#section-2.3 .section}
### [2.3.](#section-2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Limitation of the Number of Queries](#name-limitation-of-the-number-of){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-limitation-of-the-number-of}

When using QNAME minimisation, the number of labels in the received
QNAME can influence the number of queries sent from the resolver. This
opens an attack vector and can decrease performance. Resolvers
supporting QNAME minimisation [MUST]{.bcp14} implement a mechanism to
limit the number of outgoing queries per user
request.[¶](#section-2.3-1){.pilcrow}

Take for example an incoming QNAME with many labels, like
www.host.group.department.example.com, where
host.group.department.example.com is hosted on example.com\'s name
servers. (Such deep domains are especially common under ip6.arpa.)
Assume a resolver that knows only the name servers of example.com.
Without QNAME minimisation, it would send these example.com name servers
a query for www.host.group.department.example.com and immediately get a
specific referral or an answer, without the need for more queries to
probe for the zone cut. For such a name, a cold resolver with QNAME
minimisation will send more queries, one per label. Once the cache is
warm, there will be less difference with a traditional resolver. Testing
of this is described in
\[[Huque-QNAME-Min](#Huque-QNAME-Min){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2.3-2){.pilcrow}

The behaviour of sending multiple queries can be exploited by sending
queries with a large number of labels in the QNAME that will be answered
using a wildcard record. Take for example a record for \*.example.com,
hosted on example.com\'s name servers. An incoming query containing a
QNAME with more than 100 labels, ending in example.com, will result in a
query per label. By using random labels, the attacker can bypass the
cache and always require the resolver to send many queries upstream.
Note that \[[RFC8198](#RFC8198){.xref}\] can limit this attack in some
cases.[¶](#section-2.3-3){.pilcrow}

One mechanism that [MAY]{.bcp14} be used to reduce this attack vector is
by appending more than one label per iteration for QNAMEs with a large
number of labels. To do this, a maximum number of QNAME minimisation
iterations [MUST]{.bcp14} be selected (MAX_MINIMISE_COUNT); a
[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} value is 10. Optionally, a value for the number of
queries that should only have one label appended [MAY]{.bcp14} be
selected (MINIMISE_ONE_LAB); a good value is 4. The assumption here is
that the number of labels on delegations higher in the hierarchy are
rather small; therefore, not exposing too many labels early on has the
most privacy benefit.[¶](#section-2.3-4){.pilcrow}

Another potential, optional mechanism for limiting the number of queries
is to assume that labels that begin with an underscore (\_) character do
not represent privacy-relevant administrative boundaries. For example,
if the QNAME is \"\_25.\_tcp.mail.example.org\" and the algorithm has
already searched for \"mail.example.org\", the next query can be for all
the underscore-prefixed names together, namely
\"\_25.\_tcp.mail.example.org\".[¶](#section-2.3-5){.pilcrow}

When a resolver needs to send out a query, it will look for the
closest-known delegation point in its cache. The number of
not-yet-exposed labels is the difference between this closest name
server and the incoming QNAME. The first MINIMISE_ONE_LAB labels will be
handled as described in [Section 2](#qname-main){.xref}. The number of
labels that are still not exposed now need to be divided proportionally
over the remaining iterations (MAX_MINIMISE_COUNT - MINIMISE_ONE_LAB).
If the not-yet-exposed labels cannot be equally divided over the
remaining iterations, the remainder of the division should be added to
the last iterations. For example, when resolving a QNAME with 18 labels
with MAX_MINIMISE_COUNT set to 10 and MINIMISE_ONE_LAB set to 4, the
number of labels added per iteration are:
1,1,1,1,2,2,2,2,3,3.[¶](#section-2.3-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-2.4 .section}
### [2.4.](#section-2.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Implementation by Stub and Forwarding Resolvers](#name-implementation-by-stub-and-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-implementation-by-stub-and-}

Stub and forwarding resolvers [MAY]{.bcp14} implement QNAME
minimisation. Minimising queries that will be sent to an upstream
resolver does not help in hiding data from the upstream resolver because
all information will end up there anyway. It might however limit the
data exposure between the upstream resolver and the authoritative name
server in the situation where the upstream resolver does not support
QNAME minimisation. Using QNAME minimisation in a stub or forwarding
resolver that does not have a mechanism to find and cache zone cuts will
drastically increase the number of outgoing
queries.[¶](#section-2.4-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#zonecutalgo}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Algorithm to Perform QNAME Minimisation](#name-algorithm-to-perform-qname-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-algorithm-to-perform-qname-}

This algorithm performs name resolution with QNAME minimisation in the
presence of zone cuts that are not yet known.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

Although a validating resolver already has the logic to find the zone
cuts, implementers of resolvers may want to use this algorithm to locate
the zone cuts.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

\(0\)
:   If the query can be answered from the cache, do so; otherwise,
    iterate as follows:[¶](#section-3-3.1){.pilcrow}
:   

\(1\)

:   Get the closest delegation point that can be used for the original
    QNAME from the cache.[¶](#section-3-3.2.1){.pilcrow}

    []{.break}

    (1a)
    :   For queries with a QTYPE for which the authority only lies at
        the parent side (like QTYPE=DS), this is the NS RRset with the
        owner matching the most labels with QNAME stripped by one label.
        QNAME will be a subdomain of (but not equal to) this NS RRset.
        Call this ANCESTOR.[¶](#section-3-3.2.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :   

    (1b)
    :   For queries with other original QTYPEs, this is the NS RRset
        with the owner matching the most labels with QNAME. QNAME will
        be equal to or a subdomain of this NS RRset. Call this
        ANCESTOR.[¶](#section-3-3.2.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   

\(2\)
:   Initialise CHILD to the same as
    ANCESTOR.[¶](#section-3-3.3){.pilcrow}
:   

\(3\)
:   If CHILD is the same as QNAME, or if CHILD is one label shorter than
    QNAME and the original QTYPE can only be at the parent side (like
    QTYPE=DS), resolve the original query as normal, starting from
    ANCESTOR\'s name servers. Start over from step 0 if new names need
    to be resolved as a result of this answer, for example, when the
    answer contains a CNAME or DNAME \[[RFC6672](#RFC6672){.xref}\]
    record.[¶](#section-3-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

\(4\)
:   Otherwise, update the value of CHILD by adding the next relevant
    label or labels from QNAME to the start of CHILD. The number of
    labels to add is discussed in [Section
    2.3](#number-of-queries){.xref}.[¶](#section-3-3.5){.pilcrow}
:   

\(5\)
:   Look for a cache entry for the RRset at CHILD with the original
    QTYPE. If the cached response code is NXDOMAIN and the resolver has
    support for \[[RFC8020](#RFC8020){.xref}\], the NXDOMAIN can be used
    in response to the original query, and stop. If the cached response
    code is NOERROR (including NODATA), go back to step 3. If the cached
    response code is NXDOMAIN and the resolver does not support
    \[[RFC8020](#RFC8020){.xref}\], go back to step
    3.[¶](#section-3-3.6){.pilcrow}
:   

\(6\)

:   Query for CHILD with the selected QTYPE using one of ANCESTOR\'s
    name servers. The response can be:[¶](#section-3-3.7.1){.pilcrow}

    []{.break}

    (6a)
    :   A referral. Cache the NS RRset from the authority section, and
        go back to step 1.[¶](#section-3-3.7.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :   

    (6b)
    :   A DNAME response. Proceed as if a DNAME is received for the
        original query. Start over from step 0 to resolve the new name
        based on the DNAME target.[¶](#section-3-3.7.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    (6c)
    :   All other NOERROR answers (including NODATA). Cache this answer.
        Regardless of the answered RRset type, including CNAMEs,
        continue with the algorithm from step 3 by building the original
        QNAME.[¶](#section-3-3.7.2.3){.pilcrow}
    :   

    (6d)
    :   An NXDOMAIN response. If the resolver supports
        \[[RFC8020](#RFC8020){.xref}\], return an NXDOMAIN response to
        the original query, and stop. If the resolver does not support
        \[[RFC8020](#RFC8020){.xref}\], go to step
        3.[¶](#section-3-3.7.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    (6e)
    :   A timeout or response with another RCODE. The implementation may
        choose to retry step 6 with a different ANCESTOR name
        server.[¶](#section-3-3.7.2.5){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [QNAME Minimisation Examples](#name-qname-minimisation-examples){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-qname-minimisation-examples}

As a first example, assume that a resolver receives a request to resolve
foo.bar.baz.example. Assume that the resolver already knows that
ns1.nic.example is authoritative for .example and that the resolver does
not know a more specific authoritative name server. It will send the
query with QNAME=baz.example and the QTYPE selected to hide the original
QTYPE to ns1.nic.example.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-cold-cache-traditional-reso}

  QTYPE   QNAME             TARGET                    NOTE
  ------- ----------------- ------------------------- ------
  MX      a.b.example.org   root name server          
  MX      a.b.example.org   org name server           
  MX      a.b.example.org   example.org name server   

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [Cold Cache, Traditional Resolution
  Algorithm without QNAME Minimisation, Request for MX Record of
  a.b.example.org](#name-cold-cache-traditional-reso){.selfRef}

The following are more detailed examples of requests for an MX record of
a.b.example.org with QNAME minimisation, using A QTYPE to hide the
original QTYPE and using other names and authoritative
servers:[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-cold-cache-with-qname-minim}

  QTYPE   QNAME             TARGET                    NOTE
  ------- ----------------- ------------------------- ------------------------
  A       org               root name server          
  A       example.org       org name server           
  A       b.example.org     example.org name server   
  A       a.b.example.org   example.org name server   \"a\" may be delegated
  MX      a.b.example.org   example.org name server   

  : [Table 2](#table-2){.selfRef}: [Cold Cache with QNAME
  Minimisation](#name-cold-cache-with-qname-minim){.selfRef}

Note that, in the above example, one query would have been saved if the
incoming QTYPE was the same as the QTYPE selected by the resolver to
hide the original QTYPE. Only one query for a.b.example.org would have
been needed if the original QTYPE would have been A. Using the most-used
QTYPE to hide the original QTYPE therefore slightly reduces the number
of outgoing queries compared to using any other QTYPE to hide the
original QTYPE.[¶](#section-4-5){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-warm-cache-with-qname-minim}

  QTYPE   QNAME             TARGET                    NOTE
  ------- ----------------- ------------------------- ------------------------
  A       example.org       org name server           
  A       b.example.org     example.org name server   
  A       a.b.example.org   example.org name server   \"a\" may be delegated
  MX      a.b.example.org   example.org name server   

  : [Table 3](#table-3){.selfRef}: [Warm Cache with QNAME
  Minimisation](#name-warm-cache-with-qname-minim){.selfRef}
:::

::: {#perf_cons}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Performance Considerations](#name-performance-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-performance-considerations}

The main goal of QNAME minimisation is to improve privacy by sending
less data. However, it may have other advantages. For instance, if a
resolver sends a root name server queries for A.example followed by
B.example followed by C.example, the result will be three NXDOMAINs,
since .example does not exist in the root zone. When using QNAME
minimisation, the resolver would send only one question (for .example
itself) to which they could answer NXDOMAIN. The resolver can cache this
answer and use it to prove that nothing below .example exists
\[[RFC8020](#RFC8020){.xref}\]. A resolver now knows a priori that
neither B.example nor C.example exist. Thus, in this common case, the
total number of upstream queries under QNAME minimisation could be
counterintuitively less than the number of queries under the traditional
iteration (as described in the DNS standard).[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

QNAME minimisation can increase the number of queries based on the
incoming QNAME. This is described in [Section
2.3](#number-of-queries){.xref}. As described in
\[[devries-qnamemin](#devries-qnamemin){.xref}\], QNAME minimisation
both increases the number of DNS lookups by up to 26% and leads to up to
5% more failed lookups. Filling the cache in a production resolver will
soften that overhead.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

QNAME minimisation\'s benefits are clear in the case where you want to
decrease exposure of the queried name to the authoritative name server.
But minimising the amount of data sent also, in part, addresses the case
of a wire sniffer as well as the case of privacy invasion by the
authoritative name servers. Encryption is of course a better defense
against wire sniffers, but, unlike QNAME minimisation, it changes the
protocol and cannot be deployed unilaterally. Also, the effect of QNAME
minimisation on wire sniffers depends on whether the sniffer is on the
DNS path.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

QNAME minimisation offers no protection against the recursive resolver,
which still sees the full request coming from the stub
resolver.[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

A resolver using QNAME minimisation can possibly be used to cause a
query storm to be sent to servers when resolving queries containing a
QNAME with a large number of labels, as described in [Section
2.3](#number-of-queries){.xref}. That section proposes methods to
significantly dampen the effects of such
attacks.[¶](#section-6-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC1034\]
:   [Mockapetris, P.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Domain names - concepts and
    facilities\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 13]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    1034]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC1034]{.seriesInfo}, November
    1987, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1034>\>.
:   

\[RFC1035\]
:   [Mockapetris, P.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Domain names - implementation and
    specification\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 13]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    1035]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC1035]{.seriesInfo}, November
    1987, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1035>\>.
:   

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC6973\]
:   [Cooper, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Tschofenig, H.]{.refAuthor},
    [Aboba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [Peterson, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Morris, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Hansen, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [R.
    Smith]{.refAuthor}, [\"Privacy Considerations for Internet
    Protocols\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6973]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6973]{.seriesInfo}, July 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6973>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8499\]
:   [Hoffman, P.]{.refAuthor}, [Sullivan, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [K.
    Fujiwara]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS Terminology\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP
    219]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8499]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8499]{.seriesInfo}, January 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8499>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-7.2 .section}
### [7.2.](#section-7.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[apnic-qnamemin\]
:   [Huston, G.]{.refAuthor} and [J. Damas]{.refAuthor}, [\"Measuring
    Query Name Minimization\"]{.refTitle}, September 2020,
    \<<https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/34/contributions/787/attachments/777/1326/2020-09-28-oarc33-qname-minimisation.pdf>\>.
:   

\[devries-qnamemin\]
:   [de Vries, W.]{.refAuthor}, [Scheitle, Q.]{.refAuthor},
    [Müller, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Toorop, W.]{.refAuthor},
    [Dolmans, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [R. van Rijswijk-Deij]{.refAuthor},
    [\"A First Look at QNAME Minimization in the Domain Name
    System\"]{.refTitle}, March 2019,
    \<<https://nlnetlabs.nl/downloads/publications/devries2019.pdf>\>.
:   

\[dnsthought-qnamemin\]
:   [\"Qname Minimisation\"]{.refTitle}, October 2021,
    \<<https://dnsthought.nlnetlabs.nl/#qnamemin>\>.
:   

\[Huque-QNAME-Min\]
:   [Huque, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Query name minimization and
    authoritative server behavior\"]{.refTitle}, May 2015,
    \<<https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/21/contribution/9>\>.
:   

\[RFC2181\]
:   [Elz, R.]{.refAuthor} and [R. Bush]{.refAuthor}, [\"Clarifications
    to the DNS Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 2181]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC2181]{.seriesInfo}, July 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2181>\>.
:   

\[RFC6672\]
:   [Rose, S.]{.refAuthor} and [W. Wijngaards]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNAME
    Redirection in the DNS\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6672]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6672]{.seriesInfo}, June 2012,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6672>\>.
:   

\[RFC6895\]
:   [Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Domain Name System (DNS) IANA
    Considerations\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 42]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    6895]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6895]{.seriesInfo}, April 2013,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6895>\>.
:   

\[RFC7816\]
:   [Bortzmeyer, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS Query Name Minimisation to
    Improve Privacy\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7816]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7816]{.seriesInfo}, March 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7816>\>.
:   

\[RFC8020\]
:   [Bortzmeyer, S.]{.refAuthor} and [S. Huque]{.refAuthor},
    [\"NXDOMAIN: There Really Is Nothing Underneath\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8020]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8020]{.seriesInfo}, November
    2016, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8020>\>.
:   

\[RFC8198\]
:   [Fujiwara, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Kato, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [W.
    Kumari]{.refAuthor}, [\"Aggressive Use of DNSSEC-Validated
    Cache\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8198]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8198]{.seriesInfo}, July 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8198>\>.
:   

\[RFC9076\]
:   [Wicinski, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS Privacy
    Considerations\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 9076]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC9076]{.seriesInfo}, July 2021,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9076>\>.
:   

\[verisign-qnamemin\]
:   [Thomas, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Maximizing Qname Minimization: A New
    Chapter in DNS Protocol Evolution\"]{.refTitle}, September 2020,
    \<<https://blog.verisign.com/security/maximizing-qname-minimization-a-new-chapter-in-dns-protocol-evolution/>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

The acknowledgments from RFC 7816 apply here. In addition, many
participants from the DNSOP Working Group helped with proposals for
simplification, clarification, and general editorial
help.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Stephane Bortzmeyer]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[AFNIC]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[1, rue Stephenson]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[78180]{.postal-code} [Montigny-le-Bretonneux]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[France]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+33 1 39 30 83 46](tel:+33%201%2039%2030%2083%2046){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <bortzmeyer+ietf@nic.fr>
:::

::: url
URI: <https://www.afnic.fr/>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ralph Dolmans]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[NLnet Labs]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <ralph@nlnetlabs.nl>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Paul Hoffman]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[ICANN]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <paul.hoffman@icann.org>
:::
:::
:::
