  RFC 9178        Power-Efficient Cellular CoAP Devices   May 2022
  --------------- --------------------------------------- ----------
  Arkko, et al.   Informational                           \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9178](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9178){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   May 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Arkko
    :::

    ::: org
    Ericsson
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    A. Eriksson
    :::

    ::: org
    Independent
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    A. Keränen
    :::

    ::: org
    Ericsson
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9178 {#rfcnum}

# Building Power-Efficient Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) Devices for Cellular Networks {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This memo discusses the use of the Constrained Application Protocol
(CoAP) in building sensors and other devices that employ cellular
networks as a communications medium. Building communicating devices that
employ these networks is obviously well known, but this memo focuses
specifically on techniques necessary to minimize power
consumption.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Not all documents approved
by the IESG are candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see
Section 2 of RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9178>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal
Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the Revised
BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Goals for Low-Power
    Operation](#name-goals-for-low-power-operati){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Link-Layer
    Assumptions](#name-link-layer-assumptions){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Scenarios](#name-scenarios){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Discovery and
    Registration](#name-discovery-and-registration){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Data Formats](#name-data-formats){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Real-Time Reachable
    Devices](#name-real-time-reachable-devices){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Sleepy
    Devices](#name-sleepy-devices){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.1}
        [8.1](#section-8.1){.xref}.  [Implementation
        Considerations](#name-implementation-consideratio){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [11](#section-11){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.1}
        [11.1](#section-11.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.2}
        [11.2](#section-11.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.13}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#intro}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

This memo discusses the use of the Constrained Application Protocol
(CoAP) \[[RFC7252](#RFC7252){.xref}\] in building sensors and other
devices that employ cellular networks as a communications medium.
Building communicating devices that employ these networks is obviously
well known, but this memo focuses specifically on techniques necessary
to minimize power consumption. CoAP has many advantages, including being
simple to implement; a thousand lines of code for the entire application
above the IP layer is plenty for a CoAP-based sensor, for instance.
However, while many of these advantages are obvious and easily obtained,
optimizing power consumption remains challenging and requires careful
design
\[[Tiny-CoAP](#I-D.arkko-core-sleepy-sensors){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

This memo primarily targets 3GPP cellular networks in their 2G, 3G, LTE,
and 5G variants and their future enhancements, including possible power
efficiency improvements at the radio and link layers. The exact
standards or details of the link layer or radios are not relevant for
our purposes, however. To be more precise, the material in this memo is
suitable for any large-scale, public network that employs a
point-to-point communications model and radio technology for the devices
in the network.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

Our focus is on devices that need to be optimized for power usage and
devices that employ CoAP. As a general technology, CoAP is similar to
HTTP. It can be used in various ways, and network entities may take on
different roles. This freedom allows the technology to be used in
efficient and less efficient ways. Some guidance is needed to understand
what types of communication over CoAP are recommended when low power
usage is a critical goal.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

The recommendations in this memo should be taken as complementary to
device hardware optimization, microelectronics improvements, and further
evolution of the underlying link and radio layers. Further gains in
power efficiency can certainly be gained on several fronts; the approach
that we take in this memo is to do what can be done at the IP,
transport, and application layers to provide the best possible power
efficiency. Application implementors generally have to use the
current-generation microelectronics, currently available radio networks
and standards, and so on. This focus in our memo should by no means be
taken as an indication that further evolution in these other areas is
unnecessary. Such evolution is useful, ongoing, and generally
complementary to the techniques presented in this memo. However, the
list of techniques described in this document as useful for a particular
application may change with the evolution of these underlying
technologies.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

The rest of this memo is structured as follows. [Section
2](#lowpow){.xref} discusses the need and goals for low-power devices.
[Section 3](#model){.xref} outlines our expectations for the low-layer
communications model. [Section 4](#scen){.xref} describes the two
scenarios that we address. Sections [5](#disc){.xref},
[6](#data){.xref}, [7](#rt){.xref}, and [8](#sens){.xref} give
guidelines for the use of CoAP in these
scenarios.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

This document was originally finalized in 2016 but is published six
years later due to waiting for key references to reach RFC status.
Therefore, some of the latest advancements in cellular network, CoAP,
and other technologies are not discussed here, and some of the
references point to documents that were state of the art in
2016.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#lowpow}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Goals for Low-Power Operation](#name-goals-for-low-power-operati){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-goals-for-low-power-operati}

There are many situations where power usage optimization is unnecessary.
Optimization may not be necessary on devices that can run on a power
feed over wired communications media, such as in Power-over-Ethernet
(PoE) solutions. These devices may require a rudimentary level of power
optimization techniques just to keep overall energy costs and aggregate
power feed sizes at a reasonable level, but more extreme techniques
necessary for battery-powered devices are not required. The situation is
similar with devices that can easily be connected to mains power. Other
types of devices may get an occasional charge of power from
energy-harvesting techniques. For instance, some environmental sensors
can run on solar cells. Typically, these devices still have to regulate
their power usage in a strict manner \-- for instance, to be able to use
solar cells that are as small and inexpensive as
possible.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

In battery-operated devices, power usage is even more important. For
instance, one of the authors employs over a hundred different sensor
devices in their home network. A majority of these devices are wired and
run on PoE, but in most environments this would be impractical because
the necessary wires do not exist. The future is in wireless solutions
that can cover buildings and other environments without assuming a
pre-existing wired infrastructure. In addition, in many cases it is
impractical to provide a mains power source. Often, there are no power
sockets easily available in the locations that the devices need to be
in, and even if there were, setting up the wires and power adapters
would be more complicated than installing a standalone device without
any wires.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

Yet, with a large number of devices, the battery lifetimes become
critical. Cost and practical limits dictate that devices can be largely
just bought and left on their own. For instance, with a hundred devices,
even a ten-year battery lifetime results in a monthly battery change for
one device within the network. This may be impractical in many
environments. In addition, some devices may be physically difficult to
reach for a battery change. Or, a large group of devices \-- such as
utility meters or environmental sensors \-- cannot be economically
serviced too often, even if in theory the batteries could be
changed.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

Many of these situations lead to a requirement for minimizing power
usage and/or maximizing battery lifetimes. Using the power usage
strategies described in \[[RFC7228](#RFC7228){.xref}\], mains-powered
sensor-type devices can use the Always-on strategy, whereas
battery-operated or energy-harvesting devices need to adjust behavior
based on the communication interval. For intervals on the order of
seconds, the Low-power strategy is appropriate. For intervals ranging
from minutes to hours, either the Low-power or Normally-off strategy is
suitable. Finally, for intervals lasting days or longer, Normally-off is
usually the best choice. Unfortunately, much of our current technology
has been built with different objectives in mind \-- for instance,
networked devices that are \"always on\", gadgets that require humans to
recharge them every couple of days, and protocols that have been
optimized to maximize throughput rather than conserve
resources.[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

Long battery lifetimes are required for many applications, however. In
some cases, these lifetimes should be on the order of years or even a
decade or longer. Some communication devices already reach multi-year
lifetimes, and continuous improvements in low-power electronics and
advances in radio technology keep pushing these lifetimes longer.
However, it is perhaps fair to say that battery lifetimes are generally
too short at present.[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}

Power usage cannot be evaluated based solely on lower-layer
communications. The entire system, including upper-layer protocols and
applications, is responsible for the power consumption as a whole. The
lower communication layers have already adopted many techniques that can
be used to reduce power usage, such as scheduling device wake-up times.
Further reductions will likely need some cooperation from the upper
layers so that unnecessary communications, denial-of-service attacks on
power consumption, and other power drains are
eliminated.[¶](#section-2-6){.pilcrow}

Of course, application requirements ultimately determine what kinds of
communications are necessary. For instance, some applications require
more data to be sent than others. The purpose of the guidelines in this
memo is not to prefer one or the other application, but to provide
guidance on how to minimize the amount of communications overhead that
is not directly required by the application. While such optimization is
generally useful, it is, relatively speaking, most noticeable in
applications that transfer only a small amount of data or operate only
infrequently.[¶](#section-2-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#model}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Link-Layer Assumptions](#name-link-layer-assumptions){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-link-layer-assumptions}

We assume that the underlying communications network can be any
large-scale, public network that employs a point-to-point communications
model and radio technology.  2G, 3G, LTE, and 5G networks are examples
of such networks but are not the only possible networks with these
characteristics.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

In the following, we look at some of these characteristics and their
implications. Note that in most cases these characteristics are not
properties of the specific networks but rather are inherent in the
concept of public networks.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-3-3.1}
    Public Networks[¶](#section-3-3.1.1){.pilcrow}

    Using a public network service implies that applications can be
    deployed without having to build a network to go with them. For
    economic reasons, only the largest users (such as utility companies)
    could afford to build their own network, and even they would not be
    able to provide worldwide coverage. This means that applications
    where coverage is important can be built. For instance, most
    transport-sector applications require national or even worldwide
    coverage to work.[¶](#section-3-3.1.2){.pilcrow}

    But there are other implications as well. By definition, the network
    is not tailored for this application, and, with some exceptions, the
    traffic passes through the Internet. One implication of this is that
    there are generally no application-specific network configurations
    or discovery support. For instance, the public network helps devices
    to get on the Internet, set up default routers, configure DNS
    servers, and so on, but does nothing for configuring possible
    higher-layer functions, such as servers that a device might need to
    contact to perform its application
    functions.[¶](#section-3-3.1.3){.pilcrow}

    Public networks often provide web proxies and other functionality
    that can, in some cases, make significant improvements related to
    delays and costs of communication over the wireless link. For
    instance, resolving server DNS names in a proxy instead of the
    user\'s device may cut down on the general chattiness of the
    communications, therefore reducing overall delay in completing the
    entire transaction. Likewise, a CoAP proxy or Publish-Subscribe
    (pub⁠/sub) Broker
    \[[CoAP-PubSub](#I-D.ietf-core-coap-pubsub){.xref}\] can assist a
    CoAP device in communication. However, unlike HTTP web proxies, CoAP
    proxies and brokers are not yet widely deployed in public
    networks.[¶](#section-3-3.1.4){.pilcrow}

    Similarly, given the lack of available IPv4 addresses, chances are
    that many devices are behind a Network Address Translation (NAT)
    device. This means that they are not easily reachable as servers.
    Alternatively, the devices may be directly on the global Internet
    (on either IPv4 or IPv6) and easily reachable as servers.
    Unfortunately, this may mean that they also receive unwanted
    traffic, which may have implications for both power consumption and
    service costs.[¶](#section-3-3.1.5){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-3-3.2}
    Point-to-Point Link Model[¶](#section-3-3.2.1){.pilcrow}

    This is a common link model in cellular networks. One implication of
    this model is that there will be no other nodes on the same link,
    except maybe for the service provider\'s router. As a result,
    multicast discovery cannot be reasonably used for any local
    discovery purposes. While the configuration of the service
    provider\'s router for specific users is theoretically possible,
    this is difficult to achieve in practice, at least for any small
    user that cannot afford a network-wide contract for a private APN
    (Access Point Name). The public network access service has little
    per-user tailoring.[¶](#section-3-3.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-3-3.3}
    Radio Technology[¶](#section-3-3.3.1){.pilcrow}

    The use of radio technology means that power is needed to operate
    the radios. Transmission generally requires more power than
    reception. However, radio protocols have generally been designed so
    that a device checks periodically to see whether it has messages. In
    a situation where messages arrive seldom or not at all, this
    checking consumes energy. Research has shown that these periodic
    checks (such as LTE paging message reception) are often a far bigger
    contributor to energy consumption than message
    transmission.[¶](#section-3-3.3.2){.pilcrow}

    Note that for situations where there are several applications on the
    same device wishing to communicate with the Internet in some manner,
    bundling those applications together so that they can communicate at
    the same time can be very useful. Some guidance for these techniques
    in the smartphone context can be found in
    \[[Android-Bundle](#Android-Bundle){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-3.3.3){.pilcrow}
    :::

Naturally, each device has the freedom to decide when it sends messages.
In addition, we assume that there is some way for the devices to control
when or how often they want to receive messages. Specific methods for
doing this depend on the specific network being used and also tend to
change as improvements in the design of these networks are incorporated.
The reception control methods generally come in two variants:
(1) fine-grained mechanisms that deal with how often the device needs to
wake up for paging messages and (2) cruder mechanisms where the device
simply disconnects from the network for a period of time. There are
costs and benefits associated with each method, but those are not
relevant for this memo, as long as some control method exists.
Furthermore, devices could use Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN)
mechanisms \[[RFC4838](#RFC4838){.xref}\] to relax the requirements for
timeliness of connectivity and message
delivery.[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#scen}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Scenarios](#name-scenarios){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-scenarios}

Not all applications or situations are equal. They may require different
solutions or communication models. This memo focuses on two common
scenarios in cellular networks:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-4-2.1}
    Real-Time Reachable Devices[¶](#section-4-2.1.1){.pilcrow}

    This scenario involves all communication that requires real-time or
    near-real-time communications with a device. That is, a network
    entity must be able to reach the device with a small time lag at any
    time, and no previously agreed-upon wake-up schedule can be
    arranged. By \"real-time\", we mean any reasonable end-to-end
    communications latency, be it measured in milliseconds or seconds.
    However, unpredictable sleep states are not
    expected.[¶](#section-4-2.1.2){.pilcrow}

    Examples of devices in this category include sensors that must be
    measurable from a remote source at any instant in time, such as
    process automation sensors and actuators that require immediate
    action, such as light bulbs or door
    locks.[¶](#section-4-2.1.3){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-4-2.2}
    Sleepy Devices[¶](#section-4-2.2.1){.pilcrow}

    This scenario involves the freedom to choose when a device
    communicates. The device is often expected to be able to be in a
    sleep state for much of its time. The device itself can choose when
    it communicates, or it lets the network assist in this
    task.[¶](#section-4-2.2.2){.pilcrow}

    Examples of devices in this category include sensors that track
    slowly changing values, such as temperature sensors and actuators
    that control a relatively slow process, such as heating
    systems.[¶](#section-4-2.2.3){.pilcrow}

    Note that there may be hard real-time requirements, but they are
    expressed in terms of how fast the device can communicate \-- not in
    terms of how fast it can respond to network stimuli. For instance, a
    fire detector can be classified as a sleepy device as long as it can
    internally quickly wake up on detecting fire and initiate the
    necessary communications without
    delay.[¶](#section-4-2.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#disc}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Discovery and Registration](#name-discovery-and-registration){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-discovery-and-registration}

In both scenarios, the device will be attached to a public network.
Without special arrangements, the device will also get a dynamically
assigned IP address or an IPv6 prefix. At least one but typically
several router hops separate the device from its communicating peers
such as application servers. As a result, the address or even the
existence of the device is typically not immediately obvious to the
other nodes participating in the application. As discussed earlier,
multicast discovery has limited value in public networks; network nodes
cannot practically discover individual devices in a large public
network. And the devices cannot discover who they need to talk to, as
the public network offers just basic Internet
connectivity.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

Our recommendation is to initiate a discovery and registration process.
This allows each device to inform its peers that it has connected to the
network and that it is reachable at a given IP address. Registration
also facilitates low-power operation, since a device can delegate part
of the discovery signaling and reachability requirements to another
node.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}

The registration part is easy, e.g., with a resource directory. The
device should perform the necessary registration with such a resource
directory \-- for instance, as specified in
\[[RFC9176](#RFC9176){.xref}\]. In order to do this registration, the
device needs to know its Constrained RESTful Environments (CoRE) Link
Format description, as specified in \[[RFC6690](#RFC6690){.xref}\]. In
essence, the registration process involves performing a GET on
.well-known/core/?rt=core-rd at the address of the resource directory
and then doing a POST on the path of the discovered
resource.[¶](#section-5-3){.pilcrow}

Other mechanisms enabling device discovery and delegation of
functionality to a non-sleepy node include those discussed in
\[[CoRE-Mirror](#I-D.vial-core-mirror-proxy){.xref}\] and
\[[CoAP-PubSub](#I-D.ietf-core-coap-pubsub){.xref}\].[¶](#section-5-4){.pilcrow}

However, current CoAP specifications provide only limited support for
discovering the resource directory or other registration services. Local
multicast discovery only works in LAN-type networks; it does not work in
the public cellular networks discussed in this document. We recommend
the following alternate methods for
discovery:[¶](#section-5-5){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-5-6.1}
    Manual Configuration[¶](#section-5-6.1.1){.pilcrow}

    The DNS name of the resource directory is manually configured. This
    approach is suitable in situations where the owner of the devices
    has the resources and capabilities to do the configuration. For
    instance, a utility company can typically program its metering
    devices to point to the company
    servers.[¶](#section-5-6.1.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-5-6.2}
    Manufacturer Server[¶](#section-5-6.2.1){.pilcrow}

    The DNS name of the directory or proxy is hardwired to the software
    by the manufacturer, and the directory or proxy is actually run by
    the manufacturer. This approach is suitable in many consumer usage
    scenarios, where it would be unreasonable to assume that the
    consumer runs any specific network services. The manufacturer\'s web
    interface and the directory/proxy servers can cooperate to provide
    the desired functionality to the end user. For instance, the end
    user can register a device identity in the manufacturer\'s web
    interface and ask that specific actions be taken when the device
    does something.[¶](#section-5-6.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-5-6.3}
    Delegating Manufacturer Server[¶](#section-5-6.3.1){.pilcrow}

    The DNS name of the directory or proxy is hardwired to the software
    by the manufacturer, but this directory or proxy merely redirects
    the request to a directory or proxy run by whoever bought the
    device. This approach is suitable in many enterprise environments,
    as it allows the enterprise to be in charge of actual data
    collection and device registries; only the initial bootstrap goes
    through the manufacturer. In many cases, there are even legal
    requirements (such as EU privacy laws) that prevent providing
    unnecessary information to third
    parties.[¶](#section-5-6.3.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-5-6.4}
    Common Global Resolution
    Infrastructure[¶](#section-5-6.4.1){.pilcrow}

    The delegating manufacturer server model could be generalized into a
    reverse-DNS-like discovery infrastructure that could, for example,
    answer the question \"This is a device with identity ID 2456; where
    is my home registration server?\" However, at present, no such
    resolution system exists. (Note: The EPCGlobal system for Radio
    Frequency Identification (RFID) resolution is reminiscent of this
    approach.)[¶](#section-5-6.4.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

Besides manual configuration, these alternate mechanisms are mostly
suitable for large manufacturers and deployments. Good automated
mechanisms for discovery of devices that are manufactured and deployed
in small quantities are still needed.[¶](#section-5-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#data}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Data Formats](#name-data-formats){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-data-formats}

A variety of data formats exist for passing around data. These data
formats include XML, JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)
\[[RFC8259](#RFC8259){.xref}\], Efficient XML Interchange (EXI)
\[[W3C.REC-exi-20140211](#W3C.REC-exi-20140211){.xref}\], Concise Binary
Object Representation (CBOR) \[[RFC8949](#RFC8949){.xref}\], and various
text formats. Message lengths can have a significant effect on the
amount of energy required for the communications, and as such it is
highly desirable to keep message lengths minimal. At the same time,
extreme optimization can affect flexibility and ease of programming. The
authors recommend that readers refer to \[[RFC8428](#RFC8428){.xref}\]
for a compact but easily processed and extendable
format.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#rt}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Real-Time Reachable Devices](#name-real-time-reachable-devices){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-real-time-reachable-devices}

These devices are often best modeled as CoAP servers. The device will
have limited control over when it receives messages, and it will have to
listen actively for messages, up to the limits of the underlying link
layer. If in some phase of its operation the device also acts in the
role of a client, it can control how many transmissions it makes on its
own behalf.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}

The packet reception checks should be tailored according to the
requirements of the application. If sub-second response time is not
needed, a more infrequent checking process may save some
power.[¶](#section-7-2){.pilcrow}

For sensor-type devices, the CoAP Observe extension (Observe option)
\[[RFC7641](#RFC7641){.xref}\] may be supported. This allows the sensor
to track changes to the sensed value and make an immediate observation
response upon a change. This may reduce the amount of polling needed to
be done by the client. Unfortunately, it does not reduce the time that
the device needs to be listening for requests. Subscription requests
from clients other than the currently registered client may come in at
any time, the current client may change its request, and the device
still needs to respond to normal queries as a server. As a result, the
sensor cannot rely on having to communicate only on its own choice of
observation interval.[¶](#section-7-3){.pilcrow}

In order to act as a server, the device needs to be placed in a public
IPv4 address, be reachable over IPv6, or be hosted in a private network.
If the device is hosted on a private network, then all other nodes that
need to access this device also need to reside in the same private
network. There are multiple ways to provide private networks over public
cellular networks. One approach is to dedicate a special APN for the
private network. Corporate access via cellular networks has often been
arranged in this manner, for instance. Another approach is to use
Virtual Private Network (VPN) technology \-- for instance, IPsec-based
VPNs.[¶](#section-7-4){.pilcrow}

Power consumption from unwanted traffic is problematic in these devices,
unless they are placed in a private network or protected by an
operator-provided firewall service. Devices on an IPv6 network will be
afforded some protection due to the nature of the 2^64^ address
allocation for a single terminal in a 3GPP cellular network; the
attackers will be unable to guess the full IP address of the device.
However, this protects only the device from processing a packet, but
since the network will still deliver the packet to any of the addresses
within the assigned 64-bit prefix, packet reception costs are still
incurred.[¶](#section-7-5){.pilcrow}

Note that the VPN approach cannot prevent unwanted traffic received at
the tunnel endpoint address and may require keep-alive traffic. Special
APNs can solve this issue but require an explicit arrangement with the
service provider.[¶](#section-7-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sens}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Sleepy Devices](#name-sleepy-devices){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-sleepy-devices}

These devices are best modeled as devices that can delegate queries to
some other node \-- for instance, as mirror servers
\[[CoRE-Mirror](#I-D.vial-core-mirror-proxy){.xref}\] or CoAP pub⁠/sub
Clients \[[CoAP-PubSub](#I-D.ietf-core-coap-pubsub){.xref}\]. When the
device initializes itself, it makes a registration of itself in a server
or broker as described above in [Section 5](#disc){.xref} and then
continues to send periodic updates of sensor
values.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

As a result, the device acts only as a client and not as a server, and
can shut down all communication channels during its sleeping period. The
length of the sleeping period depends on power and application
requirements. Some environmental sensors might use a day or a week as
the period, while other devices may use smaller values ranging from
minutes to hours.[¶](#section-8-2){.pilcrow}

The ability to shut down communications and act as only a client has
four impacts:[¶](#section-8-3){.pilcrow}

-   [Radio transmission and reception can be turned off during the
    sleeping period, reducing power consumption
    significantly.[¶](#section-8-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-8-4.1}
-   [However, some power and time are consumed by having to reattach to
    the network after the end of a sleep
    period.[¶](#section-8-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-8-4.2}
-   [The window of opportunity for unwanted traffic to arrive is much
    smaller, as the device is listening for traffic only part of the
    time. Note, however, that networks may cache packets for some time.
    On the other hand, stateful firewalls can effectively remove much of
    the unwanted traffic for client-type
    devices.[¶](#section-8-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-8-4.3}
-   [The device may exist behind a NAT or a firewall without being
    impacted. Note that the \"simple security\" basic IPv6 firewall
    capability \[[RFC6092](#RFC6092){.xref}\] blocks inbound UDP traffic
    by default, so just moving to IPv6 is not a direct solution to this
    problem.[¶](#section-8-4.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-8-4.4}

For sleepy devices that represent actuators, it is also possible to use
the mirror server or pub/sub broker model. A device can receive
information from the server or broker about variable changes via either
polling or notifications.[¶](#section-8-5){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-8.1 .section}
### [8.1.](#section-8.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Implementation Considerations](#name-implementation-consideratio){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-implementation-consideratio}

There are several challenges related to implementing sleepy devices.
They need hardware that can be placed in an appropriate sleep mode but
awakened when it is time to do something again. This is not always easy
in all hardware platforms. It is important to be able to shut down as
much of the hardware as possible, preferably down to everything else
except a clock circuit. The platform also needs to support reawakening
at suitable timescales, as otherwise the device needs to be powered up
too frequently.[¶](#section-8.1-1){.pilcrow}

Most commercial cellular modem platforms do not allow applications to
suspend the state of the communications stack. Hence, after a power-off
period, they need to re-establish communications, which takes some
amount of time and extra energy.[¶](#section-8.1-2){.pilcrow}

Implementations should have a coordinated understanding of the state and
sleeping schedule. For instance, it makes no sense to keep a CPU powered
up, waiting for a message when the lower layer has been told that the
next possible paging opportunity is some time
away.[¶](#section-8.1-3){.pilcrow}

The cellular networks have a number of adjustable configuration
parameters, such as the maximum used paging interval. Proper settings of
these values have an impact on the power consumption of the device, but
with current business practices, such settings are rarely negotiated
when the user\'s subscription is
provisioned.[¶](#section-8.1-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

There are no particular security aspects related to what has been
discussed in this memo, except for the ability to delegate queries for a
resource to another node. Depending on how this is done, there are
obvious security issues that have largely NOT yet been addressed in the
relevant Internet-Drafts
\[[CoRE-Mirror](#I-D.vial-core-mirror-proxy){.xref}\]
\[[CoAP-Alive](#I-D.castellani-core-alive){.xref}\]
\[[CoAP-Publ-Monitor](#I-D.fossati-core-publish-monitor-options){.xref}\].
However, we point out that, in general, security issues in delegation
can be solved through either reliance on your local network support
nodes (which may be quite reasonable in many environments) or explicit
end-to-end security. Explicit end-to-end security through nodes that are
awake at different times means, in practice, end-to-end data object
security. We have implemented one such mechanism for sleepy nodes as
described in \[[RFC8387](#RFC8387){.xref}\].[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

The security considerations relating to CoAP
\[[RFC7252](#RFC7252){.xref}\] and the relevant link layers should
apply. Note that cellular networks universally employ per-device
authentication, integrity protection, and, for most of the world,
encryption of all their communications. Additional protection of
transport sessions is possible through mechanisms described in
\[[RFC7252](#RFC7252){.xref}\] or data
objects.[¶](#section-9-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#iana}
::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-10-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-11 .section}
## [11.](#section-11){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-11.1 .section}
### [11.1.](#section-11.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC8259\]
:   [Bray, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The JavaScript Object Notation
    (JSON) Data Interchange Format\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 90]{.seriesInfo},
    [RFC 8259]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8259]{.seriesInfo},
    December 2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259>\>.
:   

\[RFC6690\]
:   [Shelby, Z.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Constrained RESTful Environments (CoRE)
    Link Format\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6690]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6690]{.seriesInfo}, August 2012,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6690>\>.
:   

\[RFC7252\]
:   [Shelby, Z.]{.refAuthor}, [Hartke, K.]{.refAuthor}, and [C.
    Bormann]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Constrained Application Protocol
    (CoAP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7252]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7252]{.seriesInfo}, June 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7252>\>.
:   

\[RFC7641\]
:   [Hartke, K.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Observing Resources in the Constrained
    Application Protocol (CoAP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7641]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC7641]{.seriesInfo}, September 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7641>\>.
:   

\[RFC8949\]
:   [Bormann, C.]{.refAuthor} and [P. Hoffman]{.refAuthor}, [\"Concise
    Binary Object Representation (CBOR)\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    94]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8949]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8949]{.seriesInfo}, December 2020,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8949>\>.
:   

\[RFC9176\]
:   [Amsüss, C., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Shelby, Z.]{.refAuthor},
    [Koster, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Bormann, C.]{.refAuthor}, and [P. van der
    Stok]{.refAuthor}, [\"Constrained RESTful Environments (CoRE)
    Resource Directory\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 9176]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC9176]{.seriesInfo}, April 2022,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9176>\>.
:   

\[W3C.REC-exi-20140211\]
:   [Schneider, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Kamiya, T.]{.refAuthor},
    [Peintner, D.]{.refAuthor}, and [R. Kyusakov]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Efficient XML Interchange (EXI) Format 1.0 (Second
    Edition)\"]{.refTitle}, [World Wide Web Consortium Recommendation
    REC-exi-20140211]{.refContent}, February 2014,
    \<<https://www.w3.org/TR/exi/>\>.
:   

\[RFC8428\]
:   [Jennings, C.]{.refAuthor}, [Shelby, Z.]{.refAuthor},
    [Arkko, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Keranen, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [C.
    Bormann]{.refAuthor}, [\"Sensor Measurement Lists
    (SenML)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8428]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8428]{.seriesInfo}, August 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8428>\>.
:   

\[RFC7228\]
:   [Bormann, C.]{.refAuthor}, [Ersue, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [A.
    Keranen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Terminology for Constrained-Node
    Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7228]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7228]{.seriesInfo}, May 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7228>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-11.2 .section}
### [11.2.](#section-11.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC4838\]
:   [Cerf, V.]{.refAuthor}, [Burleigh, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Hooke, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Torgerson, L.]{.refAuthor},
    [Durst, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Scott, K.]{.refAuthor},
    [Fall, K.]{.refAuthor}, and [H. Weiss]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Delay-Tolerant Networking Architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4838]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4838]{.seriesInfo}, April 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4838>\>.
:   

\[RFC6092\]
:   [Woodyatt, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Recommended Simple Security
    Capabilities in Customer Premises Equipment (CPE) for Providing
    Residential IPv6 Internet Service\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6092]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6092]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2011, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6092>\>.
:   

\[Tiny-CoAP\]
:   [Arkko, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Rissanen, H.]{.refAuthor},
    [Loreto, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Turanyi, Z.]{.refAuthor}, and [O.
    Novo]{.refAuthor}, [\"Implementing Tiny COAP Sensors\"]{.refTitle},
    [Work in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-arkko-core-sleepy-sensors-01]{.seriesInfo}, 5 July 2011,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-arkko-core-sleepy-sensors-01>\>.
:   

\[RFC8387\]
:   [Sethi, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Arkko, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Keranen, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [H. Back]{.refAuthor}, [\"Practical
    Considerations and Implementation Experiences in Securing Smart
    Object Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8387]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8387]{.seriesInfo}, May 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8387>\>.
:   

\[CoAP-Alive\]
:   [Castellani, A.]{.refAuthor} and [S. Loreto]{.refAuthor}, [\"CoAP
    Alive Message\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-castellani-core-alive-00]{.seriesInfo}, 29
    March 2012,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-castellani-core-alive-00>\>.
:   

\[CoAP-Publ-Monitor\]
:   [Fossati, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Giacomin, P.]{.refAuthor}, and [S.
    Loreto]{.refAuthor}, [\"Publish and Monitor Options for
    CoAP\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-fossati-core-publish-monitor-options-01]{.seriesInfo}, 10
    March 2012,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-fossati-core-publish-monitor-options-01>\>.
:   

\[CoRE-Mirror\]
:   [Vial, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"CoRE Mirror Server\"]{.refTitle}, [Work
    in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-vial-core-mirror-proxy-01]{.seriesInfo}, 13 July 2012,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-vial-core-mirror-proxy-01>\>.
:   

\[CoAP-PubSub\]
:   [Koster, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Keranen, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [J.
    Jimenez]{.refAuthor}, [\"Publish-Subscribe Broker for the
    Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-core-coap-pubsub-10]{.seriesInfo}, 4 May 2022,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-core-coap-pubsub-10>\>.
:   

\[Android-Bundle\]
:   [\"Optimize network access\"]{.refTitle}, [Android developer
    note]{.refContent}, May 2022,
    \<<https://developer.android.com/training/efficient-downloads/efficient-network-access.html>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

The authors would like to thank [Zach Shelby]{.contact-name}, [Jan
Holler]{.contact-name}, [Salvatore Loreto]{.contact-name}, [Matthew
Vial]{.contact-name}, [Thomas Fossati]{.contact-name}, [Mohit
Sethi]{.contact-name}, [Jan Melen]{.contact-name}, [Joachim
Sachs]{.contact-name}, [Heidi-Maria Rissanen]{.contact-name}, [Sebastien
Pierrel]{.contact-name}, [Kumar Balachandran]{.contact-name}, [Muhammad
Waqas Mir]{.contact-name}, [Cullen Jennings]{.contact-name}, [Markus
Isomaki]{.contact-name}, [Hannes Tschofenig]{.contact-name}, and [Anna
Larmo]{.contact-name} for interesting discussions in this problem
space.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jari Arkko]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
FI-[02420]{.postal-code} [Jorvas]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Finland]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <jari.arkko@piuha.net>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Anders Eriksson]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Independent]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
SE-[164 83]{.postal-code} [Stockholm]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Sweden]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <anders.e.eriksson@posthem.se>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ari Keränen]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
FI-[02420]{.postal-code} [Jorvas]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Finland]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <ari.keranen@ericsson.com>
:::
:::
:::
