  RFC 9183        Single Nickname for Area Border RBridge   February 2022
  --------------- ----------------------------------------- ---------------
  Zhang, et al.   Standards Track                           \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9183](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9183){.eref}

Category:
:   Standards Track

Published:
:   February 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Zhang
    :::

    ::: org
    Independent
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    D. Eastlake 3rd
    :::

    ::: org
    Futurewei
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    R. Perlman
    :::

    ::: org
    EMC
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Cullen
    :::

    ::: org
    Painless Security
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    H. Zhai
    :::

    ::: org
    JIT
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9183 {#rfcnum}

# Single Nickname for an Area Border RBridge in Multilevel Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links (TRILL) {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

A major issue in multilevel TRILL is how to manage RBridge nicknames. In
this document, area border RBridges use a single nickname in both Level
1 and Level 2. RBridges in Level 2 must obtain unique nicknames but
RBridges in different Level 1 areas may have the same
nicknames.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This is an Internet Standards Track
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9183>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal
Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the Revised
BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Acronyms and
    Terminology](#name-acronyms-and-terminology){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Nickname Handling on Border
    RBridges](#name-nickname-handling-on-border){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [Actions on Unicast
        Packets](#name-actions-on-unicast-packets){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [Actions on Multi-destination
        Packets](#name-actions-on-multi-destinatio){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Per-Flow Load
    Balancing](#name-per-flow-load-balancing){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [L2-to-L1 Ingress Nickname
        Replacement](#name-l2-to-l1-ingress-nickname-r){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2}
        [4.2](#section-4.2){.xref}.  [L1-to-L2 Egress Nickname
        Replacement](#name-l1-to-l2-egress-nickname-re){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Protocol Extensions for
    Discovery](#name-protocol-extensions-for-dis){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [Discovery of Border RBridges in
        L1](#name-discovery-of-border-rbridge){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [Discovery of Border RBridge Sets
        in L2](#name-discovery-of-border-rbridge-){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [One Border RBridge Connects Multiple
    Areas](#name-one-border-rbridge-connects){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [E-L1FS/E-L2FS Backwards
    Compatibility](#name-e-l1fs-e-l2fs-backwards-com){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Manageability
    Considerations](#name-manageability-consideration){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [11](#section-11){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.1}
        [11.1](#section-11.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.2}
        [11.2](#section-11.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [Appendix A](#appendix-A){.xref}.  [Level Transition
    Clarification](#name-level-transition-clarificat){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.13}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-1}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

TRILL (Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links)
\[[RFC6325](#RFC6325){.xref}\] \[[RFC7780](#RFC7780){.xref}\] multilevel
techniques are designed to improve TRILL scalability
issues.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

\"[Alternatives for Multilevel Transparent Interconnection of Lots of
Links (TRILL)](#RFC8243){.xref}\" \[[RFC8243](#RFC8243){.xref}\] is an
educational document to explain multilevel TRILL and list possible
concerns. It does not specify a protocol. As described in
\[[RFC8243](#RFC8243){.xref}\], there have been two proposed approaches.
One approach, which is referred to as the \"unique nickname\" approach,
gives unique nicknames to all the TRILL switches in the multilevel
campus either by having the Level 1/Level 2 border TRILL switches
advertise which nicknames are not available for assignment in the area
or by partitioning the 16-bit nickname into an \"area\" field and a
\"nickname inside the area\" field. \[[RFC8397](#RFC8397){.xref}\] is
the Standards Track document specifying a \"unique nickname\" flavor of
TRILL multilevel. The other approach, which is referred to in
\[[RFC8243](#RFC8243){.xref}\] as the \"aggregated nickname\" approach,
involves assigning nicknames to the areas, and allowing nicknames to be
reused inside different areas, by having the border TRILL switches
rewrite the nickname fields when entering or leaving an area.
\[[RFC8243](#RFC8243){.xref}\] makes the case that, while unique
nickname multilevel solutions are simpler, aggregated nickname solutions
scale better.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

The approach specified in this Standards Track document is somewhat
similar to the \"aggregated nickname\" approach in
\[[RFC8243](#RFC8243){.xref}\] but with a very important difference. In
this document, the nickname of an area border RBridge is used in both
Level 1 (L1) and Level 2 (L2). No additional nicknames are assigned to
represent L1 areas as such. Instead, multiple border RBridges are
allowed and each L1 area is denoted by the set of all nicknames of those
border RBridges of the area. For this approach, nicknames in the L2 area
[MUST]{.bcp14} be unique but nicknames inside an L1 area can be reused
in other L1 areas that also use this approach. The use of the approach
specified in this document in one L1 area does not prohibit the use of
other approaches in other L1 areas in the same TRILL campus, for example
the use of the unique nickname approach specified in
\[[RFC8397](#RFC8397){.xref}\]. The TRILL packet format is unchanged by
this document, but data plane processing is changed at Border RBridges
and efficient high volume data flow at Border RBridges might require
forwarding hardware change.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-2}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Acronyms and Terminology](#name-acronyms-and-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acronyms-and-terminology}

[]{.break}

Area Border RBridge:
:   A border RBridge between a Level 1 area and Level
    2.[¶](#section-2-1.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Data Label:
:   VLAN or Fine-Grained Label (FGL).[¶](#section-2-1.4){.pilcrow}
:   

DBRB:
:   Designated Border RBridge.[¶](#section-2-1.6){.pilcrow}
:   

IS-IS:
:   Intermediate System to Intermediate System
    \[[IS-IS](#IS-IS){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-1.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Level:
:   Similar to IS-IS, TRILL has Level 1 for intra-area and Level 2 for
    inter-area. Routing information is exchanged between Level 1
    RBridges within the same Level 1 area, and Level 2 RBridges can only
    form relationships and exchange information with other Level 2
    RBridges.[¶](#section-2-1.10){.pilcrow}
:   

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

Familiarity with \[[RFC6325](#RFC6325){.xref}\] is assumed in this
document.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-3}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Nickname Handling on Border RBridges](#name-nickname-handling-on-border){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-nickname-handling-on-border}

This section provides an illustrative example and description of the
border learning border RBridge nicknames.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-an-example-topology-for-tri}

::: {#fig-1}
::: {#section-3-2.1 .alignLeft .art-text .artwork}
            Area {2,20}             Level 2             Area {3,30}
    +-------------------+     +-----------------+     +--------------+
    |                   |     |                 |     |              |
    | S--RB27---Rx--Rz----RB2---Rb---Rc--Rd---Re--RB3---Rk--RB44---D |
    |     27            |     |      39         |     |     44       |
    |                 ----RB20---             ----RB30---            |
    +-------------------+     +-----------------+     +--------------+
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [An Example Topology for TRILL
Multilevel](#name-an-example-topology-for-tri){.selfRef}
:::

In [Figure 1](#fig-1){.xref}, RB2, RB20, RB3, and RB30 are area border
TRILL switches (RBridges). Their nicknames are 2, 20, 3, and 30,
respectively, and are used as TRILL switch identifiers in their areas
\[[RFC6325](#RFC6325){.xref}\]. Area border RBridges use the set of
border nicknames to denote the L1 area that they are attached to. For
example, RB2 and RB20 use nicknames {2,20} to denote the L1 area on the
left.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

A source S is attached to RB27 and a destination D is attached to RB44.
RB27 has a nickname (say, 27), and RB44 has a nickname (say, 44). (In
fact, they could even have the same nickname, since the TRILL switch
nickname will not be visible outside these Level 1
areas.)[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}

::: {#sect-3.1}
::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Actions on Unicast Packets](#name-actions-on-unicast-packets){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-actions-on-unicast-packets}

Let\'s say that S transmits a frame to destination D and let\'s say that
D\'s location has been learned by the relevant TRILL switches already.
These relevant switches have learned the
following:[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

1\)
:   RB27 has learned that D is connected to nickname
    3.[¶](#section-3.1-2.1){.pilcrow}
:   

2\)
:   RB3 has learned that D is attached to nickname
    44.[¶](#section-3.1-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

The following sequence of events will
occur:[¶](#section-3.1-3){.pilcrow}

1.  [S transmits an Ethernet frame with source MAC = S and destination
    MAC = D.[¶](#section-3.1-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.1}
2.  [RB27 encapsulates with a TRILL header with ingress RBridge = 27 and
    egress RBridge = 3 producing a TRILL Data
    packet.[¶](#section-3.1-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.2}
3.  [RB2 and RB20 have announced in the Level 1 IS-IS area designated
    {2,20} that they are attached to the nicknames of all the border
    RBridges in the Level 2 area including RB3 and RB30. Therefore,
    IS-IS routes the packet to RB2 (or RB20, if RB20 is on the
    least-cost route from RB27 to
    RB3).[¶](#section-3.1-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.3}
4.  [RB2, when transitioning the packet from Level 1 to Level 2,
    replaces the ingress TRILL switch nickname with its own nickname,
    replacing 27 with 2. Within Level 2, the ingress RBridge field in
    the TRILL header will therefore be 2, and the egress RBridge field
    will be 3. (The egress nickname [MAY]{.bcp14} be replaced with any
    area nickname selected from {3,30} such as 30. See [Section
    4](#sect-4){.xref} for the detail of the selection method. Here,
    suppose the egress nickname remains 3.) Also, RB2 learns that S is
    attached to nickname 27 in area {2,20} to accommodate return
    traffic. RB2 [SHOULD]{.bcp14} synchronize with RB20 using the End
    Station Address Distribution Information (ESADI) protocol
    \[[RFC7357](#RFC7357){.xref}\] that MAC = S is attached to nickname
    27.[¶](#section-3.1-4.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.4}
5.  [The packet is forwarded through Level 2, to RB3, which has
    advertised, in Level 2, its L2 nickname as
    3.[¶](#section-3.1-4.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.5}
6.  [RB3, when forwarding into area {3,30}, replaces the egress nickname
    in the TRILL header with RB44\'s nickname (44) based on looking
    up D. (The ingress nickname [MAY]{.bcp14} be replaced with any area
    nickname selected from {2,20}. See [Section 4](#sect-4){.xref} for
    the detail of the selection method. Here, suppose the ingress
    nickname remains 2.) So, within the destination area, the ingress
    nickname will be 2 and the egress nickname will be
    44.[¶](#section-3.1-4.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.6}
7.  [RB44, when decapsulating, learns that S is attached to nickname 2,
    which is one of the area nicknames of the
    ingress.[¶](#section-3.1-4.7){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.1-4.7}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-3.2}
::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Actions on Multi-destination Packets](#name-actions-on-multi-destinatio){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-actions-on-multi-destinatio}

Distribution trees for flooding of multi-destination packets are
calculated separately within each L1 area and in L2. When a
multi-destination packet arrives at the border, it needs to be
transitioned either from L1 to L2, or from L2 to L1. All border RBridges
are eligible for Level transition. However, for each multi-destination
packet, only one of them acts as the Designated Border RBridge (DBRB) to
do the transition while other non-DBRBs [MUST]{.bcp14} drop the received
copies. By default, the border RBridge with the smallest nickname,
considered as an unsigned integer, is elected DBRB. All border RBridges
of an area [MUST]{.bcp14} agree on the mechanism used to determine the
DBRB locally. The use of an alternative is possible, but out of the
scope of this document; one such mechanism is used in [Section
4](#sect-4){.xref} for load balancing.[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

As per \[[RFC6325](#RFC6325){.xref}\], multi-destination packets can be
classified into three types: unicast packets with unknown destination
MAC addresses (unknown-unicast packets), multicast packets, and
broadcast packets. Now suppose that D\'s location has not been learned
by RB27 or the frame received by RB27 is recognized as broadcast or
multicast. What will happen within a Level 1 area (as it would in TRILL
today) is that RB27 will forward the packet as multi-destination,
setting its M bit to 1 and choosing an L1 tree, which would flood the
packet on that distribution tree (subject to potential
pruning).[¶](#section-3.2-2){.pilcrow}

When the copies of the multi-destination packet arrive at area border
RBridges, non-DBRBs [MUST]{.bcp14} drop the packet while the DBRB (say,
RB2) needs to do the Level transition for the multi-destination packet.
For an unknown-unicast packet, if the DBRB has learned the destination
MAC address, it [SHOULD]{.bcp14} convert the packet to unicast and set
its M bit to 0. Otherwise, the multi-destination packet will continue to
be flooded as a multicast packet on the distribution tree. The DBRB
chooses the new distribution tree by replacing the egress nickname with
the new tree root RBridge nickname from the area the packet is entering.
The following sequence of events will
occur:[¶](#section-3.2-3){.pilcrow}

1.  [RB2, when transitioning the packet from Level 1 to Level 2,
    replaces the ingress TRILL switch nickname with its own nickname,
    replacing 27 with 2. RB2 also [MUST]{.bcp14} replace the egress
    RBridge nickname with an L2 tree root RBridge nickname (say, 39). In
    order to accommodate return traffic, RB2 records that S is attached
    to nickname 27 and [SHOULD]{.bcp14} use the ESADI protocol
    \[[RFC7357](#RFC7357){.xref}\] to synchronize this attachment
    information with other border RBridges (say, RB20) in the
    area.[¶](#section-3.2-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-4.1}
2.  [RB20 will receive the packet flooded on the L2 tree by RB2. It is
    important that RB20 does not transition this packet back to L1 as it
    does for a multicast packet normally received from another remote L1
    area. RB20 should examine the ingress nickname of this packet. If
    this nickname is found to be a border RBridge nickname of the area
    {2,20}, RB2 must not forward the packet into this
    area.[¶](#section-3.2-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-4.2}
3.  [The multi-destination packet is flooded on the Level 2 tree to
    reach all border routers for all L1 areas including both RB3 and
    RB30. Suppose RB3 is the selected DBRB. The non-DBRB RB30 will drop
    the packet.[¶](#section-3.2-4.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-4.3}
4.  [RB3, when forwarding into area {3,30}, replaces the egress nickname
    in the TRILL header with the root RBridge nickname of a distribution
    tree of L1 area {3,30} \-- say, 30. (Here, the ingress nickname
    [MAY]{.bcp14} be replaced with a different area nickname selected
    from {2,20}, the set of border RBridges to the ingress area, as
    specified in [Section 4](#sect-4){.xref}.) Now suppose that RB27 has
    learned the location of D (attached to nickname 3), but RB3 does not
    know where D is because this information has fallen out of cache or
    RB3 has restarted or some other reason. In that case, RB3 must turn
    the packet into a multi-destination packet and then floods it on a
    distribution tree in the L1 area
    {3,30}.[¶](#section-3.2-4.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-4.4}
5.  [RB30 will receive the packet flooded on the L1 tree by RB3. It is
    important that RB30 does not transition this packet back to L2. RB30
    should also examine the ingress nickname of this packet. If this
    nickname is found to be an L2 Border RBridge Nickname, RB30 must not
    transition the packet back to
    L2.[¶](#section-3.2-4.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-4.5}
6.  [The multicast listener RB44, when decapsulating the received
    packet, learns that S is attached to nickname 2, which is one of the
    area nicknames of the
    ingress.[¶](#section-3.2-4.6){.pilcrow}]{#section-3.2-4.6}

See also [Appendix A](#sect-a){.xref}.[¶](#section-3.2-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-4}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Per-Flow Load Balancing](#name-per-flow-load-balancing){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-per-flow-load-balancing}

Area border RBridges perform ingress/egress nickname replacement when
they transition TRILL Data packets between Level 1 and Level 2. The
egress nickname will again be replaced when the packet transitions from
Level 2 to Level 1. This nickname replacement enables the per-flow load
balance, which is specified in the following subsections. The mechanism
specified in [Section 4.1](#sect-4.1){.xref} or that in [Section
4.2](#sect-4.2){.xref} or both is necessary in general to load-balance
traffic across L2 paths.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#sect-4.1}
::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [L2-to-L1 Ingress Nickname Replacement](#name-l2-to-l1-ingress-nickname-r){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-l2-to-l1-ingress-nickname-r}

When a TRILL Data packet from other L1 areas arrives at an area border
RBridge, this RBridge [MAY]{.bcp14} select one area nickname of the
ingress area to replace the ingress nickname of the packet so that the
returning TRILL Data packet can be forwarded to this selected nickname
to help load-balance return unicast traffic over multiple paths. The
selection is simply based on a pseudorandom algorithm as discussed in
[Section
5.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7357#section-5.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC7357](#RFC7357){.xref}\]. With the random ingress nickname
replacement, the border RBridge actually achieves a per-flow load
balance for returning traffic.[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}

All area border RBridges for an L1 area [MUST]{.bcp14} agree on the same
pseudorandom algorithm. The source MAC address, ingress area nicknames,
egress area nicknames, and the Data Label of the received TRILL Data
packet are candidate factors of the input of this pseudorandom
algorithm. Note that the value of the destination MAC address
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} be excluded from the input of this pseudorandom
algorithm; otherwise, the egress RBridge could see one source MAC
address flip-flopping among multiple ingress
RBridges.[¶](#section-4.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-4.2}
::: {#section-4.2 .section}
### [4.2.](#section-4.2){.section-number .selfRef} [L1-to-L2 Egress Nickname Replacement](#name-l1-to-l2-egress-nickname-re){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-l1-to-l2-egress-nickname-re}

When a unicast TRILL Data packet originated from an L1 area arrives at
an area border RBridge of that L1 area, that RBridge [MAY]{.bcp14}
select one area nickname of the egress area to replace the egress
nickname of the packet. By default, it [SHOULD]{.bcp14} choose the
egress area border RBridge with the least cost route to reach or, if
there are multiple equal cost egress area border RBridges, use the
pseudorandom algorithm as defined in [Section
5.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7357#section-5.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC7357](#RFC7357){.xref}\] to select one. The use of that algorithm
[MAY]{.bcp14} be extended to selection among some stable set of egress
area border RBridges that include non-least-cost alternatives if it is
desired to obtain more load spreading at the cost of sometimes using a
non-least-cost Level 2 route to forward the TRILL Data packet to the
egress area.[¶](#section-4.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-5}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Protocol Extensions for Discovery](#name-protocol-extensions-for-dis){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-protocol-extensions-for-dis}

The following topology change scenarios will trigger the discovery
processes as defined in Sections [5.1](#sect-5.1){.xref} and
[5.2](#sect-5.2){.xref}:[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

-   [A new node comes up or recovers from a previous
    failure.[¶](#section-5-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.1}
-   [A node goes down.[¶](#section-5-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.2}
-   [A link or node fails and causes partition of an L1/L2
    area.[¶](#section-5-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.3}
-   [A link or node whose failure has caused partitioning of an L1/L2
    area is repaired.[¶](#section-5-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-5-2.4}

::: {#sect-5.1}
::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Discovery of Border RBridges in L1](#name-discovery-of-border-rbridge){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-discovery-of-border-rbridge}

The following Level 1 Border RBridge APPsub-TLV will be included in
E-L1FS FS-LSP fragment zero \[[RFC7780](#RFC7780){.xref}\] as an
APPsub-TLV of the TRILL GENINFO-TLV. Through listening for this
APPsub-TLV, an area border RBridge discovers all other area border
RBridges in this area.[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5.1-2 .alignLeft .art-text .artwork}
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Type = L1-BORDER-RBRIDGE      | (2 bytes)
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Length                        | (2 bytes)
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Sender Nickname               | (2 bytes)
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

[¶](#section-5.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::

[]{.break}

Type:
:   Level 1 Border RBridge (TRILL APPsub-TLV type
    256)[¶](#section-5.1-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Length:
:   2[¶](#section-5.1-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Sender Nickname:
:   The nickname the originating IS will use as the L1 Border RBridge
    Nickname. This field is useful because the originating IS might own
    multiple nicknames.[¶](#section-5.1-3.6){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#sect-5.2}
::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Discovery of Border RBridge Sets in L2](#name-discovery-of-border-rbridge-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-discovery-of-border-rbridge-}

The following APPsub-TLV will be included in an E-L2FS FS-LSP fragment
zero \[[RFC7780](#RFC7780){.xref}\] as an APPsub-TLV of the TRILL
GENINFO-TLV. Through listening to this APPsub-TLV in L2, an area border
RBridge discovers all groups of L1 border RBridges and each such group
identifies an area.[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5.2-2 .alignLeft .art-text .artwork}
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Type = L1-BORDER-RB-GROUP     | (2 bytes)
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Length                        | (2 bytes)
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | L1 Border RBridge Nickname 1  | (2 bytes)
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | ...                           |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | L1 Border RBridge Nickname k  | (2 bytes)
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

[¶](#section-5.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::

[]{.break}

Type:
:   Level 1 Border RBridge Group (TRILL APPsub-TLV type
    257)[¶](#section-5.2-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Length:
:   2 \* k. If length is not a multiple of 2, the APPsub-TLV is corrupt
    and [MUST]{.bcp14} be ignored.[¶](#section-5.2-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

L1 Border RBridge Nickname:
:   The nickname that an area border RBridge uses as the L1 Border
    RBridge Nickname. The L1-BORDER-RB-GROUP TLV generated by an area
    border RBridge [MUST]{.bcp14} include all L1 Border RBridge
    Nicknames of the area. It\'s [RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14} that these k
    nicknames are ordered in ascending order according to the 2-octet
    nickname considered as an unsigned
    integer.[¶](#section-5.2-3.6){.pilcrow}
:   

When an L1 area is partitioned \[[RFC8243](#RFC8243){.xref}\], border
RBridges will re-discover each other in both L1 and L2 through
exchanging LSPs. In L2, the set of border RBridge nicknames for this
splitting area will change. Border RBridges that detect such a change
[MUST]{.bcp14} flush the reachability information associated to any
RBridge nickname from this changing set.[¶](#section-5.2-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-6}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [One Border RBridge Connects Multiple Areas](#name-one-border-rbridge-connects){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-one-border-rbridge-connects}

It\'s possible that one border RBridge (say, RB1) connects multiple L1
areas. RB1 [SHOULD]{.bcp14} use a single area nickname for itself for
all these areas to minimize nickname consumption and the number of
nicknames being advertised in L2; however, such a border RBridge might
have to hold multiple nicknames \-- for example, it might be the root of
multiple L1 or multiple L2 distribution
trees.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

Nicknames used within one of these L1 areas can be reused within other
areas. It\'s important that packets destined to those duplicated
nicknames are sent to the right area. Since these areas are connected to
form a layer 2 network, duplicated {MAC, Data Label} across these areas
[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14} occur (see [Section
4.2.6](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6325#section-4.2.6){.relref} of
\[[RFC6325](#RFC6325){.xref}\] for tie breaking rules). Now suppose a
TRILL Data packet arrives at the area border nickname of RB1. For a
unicast packet, RB1 can look up the {MAC, Data Label} entry in its MAC
table to identify the right destination area (i.e., the outgoing
interface) and the egress RBridge\'s nickname. For a multicast packet
for each attached L1 area: either RB1 is not the DBRB and RB1 will not
transition the packet, or RB1 is the DBRB. If RB1 is the DBRB, RB1
follows the following rules:[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

-   [If this packet originated from an area out of the connected areas,
    RB1 replicates this packet and floods it on the proper Level 1 trees
    of all the areas in which it acts as the
    DBRB.[¶](#section-6-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-3.1}
-   [If the packet originated from one of the connected areas, RB1
    replicates the packet it receives from the Level 1 tree and floods
    it on other proper Level 1 trees of all the areas in which it acts
    as the DBRB except the originating area (i.e., the area connected to
    the incoming interface). RB1 might also receive the replication of
    the packet from the Level 2 tree. This replication [MUST]{.bcp14} be
    dropped by RB1. It recognizes such packets by their ingress nickname
    being the nickname of one of the border RBridges of an L1 area for
    which the receiving border RBridge is
    DBRB.[¶](#section-6-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-3.2}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-7}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [E-L1FS/E-L2FS Backwards Compatibility](#name-e-l1fs-e-l2fs-backwards-com){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-e-l1fs-e-l2fs-backwards-com}

All Level 2 RBridges [MUST]{.bcp14} support E-L2FS
\[[RFC7356](#RFC7356){.xref}\] \[[RFC7780](#RFC7780){.xref}\]. The
Extended TLVs defined in [Section 5](#sect-5){.xref} are to be used in
Extended Level 1/2 Flooding Scope (E-L1FS/E-L2FS) Protocol Data Units
(PDUs). Area border RBridges [MUST]{.bcp14} support both E-L1FS and
E-L2FS. RBridges that do not support both E-L1FS or E-L2FS cannot serve
as area border RBridges but they can appear in an L1 area acting as
non-area-border RBridges.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-8}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Manageability Considerations](#name-manageability-consideration){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-manageability-consideration}

If an L1 Border RBridge Nickname is configured at an RBridge and that
RBridge has both L1 and L2 adjacencies, the multilevel feature as
specified in this document is turned on for that RBridge and normally
uses an L2 nickname in both L1 and L2 although, as provided below, such
an RBridge may have to fall back to multilevel unique nickname behavior
\[[RFC8397](#RFC8397){.xref}\], in which case it uses this L1 nickname.
In contrast, unique nickname multilevel as specified in
\[[RFC8397](#RFC8397){.xref}\] is enabled by the presence of L1 and L2
adjacencies without an L1 Border RBridge Nickname being configured.
RBridges supporting only unique nickname multilevel do not support the
configuration of an L2 Border RBridge Nickname. RBridges supporting only
the single-level TRILL base protocol specified in
\[[RFC6325](#RFC6325){.xref}\] do not support L2
adjacencies.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

RBridges that support and are configured to use single nickname
multilevel as specified in this document [MUST]{.bcp14} support unique
nickname multilevel \[[RFC8397](#RFC8397){.xref}\]. If there are
multiple border RBridges between an L1 area and L2, and one or more of
them only support or are only configured for unique nickname multilevel
\[[RFC8397](#RFC8397){.xref}\], any of these border RBridges that are
configured to use single nickname multilevel [MUST]{.bcp14} fall back to
behaving as a unique nickname border RBridge for that L1 area. Because
overlapping sets of RBridges may be the border RBridges for different L1
areas, an RBridge supporting single nickname [MUST]{.bcp14} be able to
simultaneously support single nickname for some of its L1 areas and
unique nickname for others. For example, RB1 and RB2 might be border
RBridges for L1 area A1 using single nickname while RB2 and RB3 are
border RBridges for area A2. If RB3 only supports unique nicknames, then
RB2 must fall back to unique nickname for area A2 but continue to
support single nickname for area A1. Operators [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be
notified when this fallback occurs. The presence of border RBridges
using unique nickname multilevel can be detected because they advertise
in L1 the blocks of nicknames available within that L1
area.[¶](#section-8-2){.pilcrow}

In both the unique nickname approach specified in
\[[RFC8397](#RFC8397){.xref}\] and the single nickname aggregated
approach specified in this document, an RBridge that has L1 and L2
adjacencies uses the same nickname in L1 and L2. If an RBridge is
configured with an L1 Border RBridge Nickname for any a Level 1 area, it
uses this nickname across the Level 2 area. This L1 Border RBridge
Nickname cannot be used in any other Level 1 area except other Level 1
areas for which the same RBridge is a border RBridge with this L1 Border
RBridge Nickname configured.[¶](#section-8-3){.pilcrow}

In addition to the manageability considerations specified above, the
manageability specifications in \[[RFC6325](#RFC6325){.xref}\] still
apply.[¶](#section-8-4){.pilcrow}

Border RBridges replace ingress and/or egress nickname when a TRILL Data
packet traverses a TRILL L2 area. A TRILL Operations, Administration,
and Maintenance (OAM) message will be forwarded through the multilevel
single nickname TRILL campus using a MAC address belonging to the
destination RBridge
\[[RFC7455](#RFC7455){.xref}\].[¶](#section-8-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-9}
::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

For general TRILL Security Considerations, see
\[[RFC6325](#RFC6325){.xref}\].[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

The newly defined TRILL APPsub-TLVs in [Section 5](#sect-5){.xref} are
transported in IS-IS PDUs whose authenticity can be enforced using
regular IS-IS security mechanism \[[IS-IS](#IS-IS){.xref}\]
\[[RFC5310](#RFC5310){.xref}\]. Malicious devices may also fake the
APPsub-TLVs to attract TRILL Data packets, interfere with multilevel
TRILL operation, induce excessive state in TRILL switches (or in any
bridges that may be part of the TRILL campus), etc. For this reason,
RBridges [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be configured to use the IS-IS Authentication
TLV (10) in their IS-IS PDUs so that IS-IS security
\[[RFC5310](#RFC5310){.xref}\] can be used to authenticate those PDUs
and discard them if they are forged.[¶](#section-9-2){.pilcrow}

Using a variation of aggregated nicknames, and the resulting possible
duplication of nicknames between areas, increases the possibility of a
TRILL Data packet being delivered to the wrong egress RBridge if areas
are unexpectedly merged as compared with a scheme where all nicknames in
the TRILL campus are, except as a transient condition, unique such as
the scheme in \[[RFC8397](#RFC8397){.xref}\]. However, in many cases,
the data would be discarded at that egress RBridge because it would not
match a known end station Data Label / MAC
address.[¶](#section-9-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-10}
::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has allocated two new types under the TRILL GENINFO TLV
\[[RFC7357](#RFC7357){.xref}\] from the range allocated by Standards
Action \[[RFC8126](#RFC8126){.xref}\] for the TRILL APPsub-TLVs defined
in [Section 5](#sect-5){.xref}. The following entries have been added to
the \"TRILL APPsub-TLV Types under IS-IS TLV 251 Application Identifier
1\" registry on the TRILL Parameters IANA web
page.[¶](#section-10-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#IANA}
  Type   Name                 Reference
  ------ -------------------- -----------
  256    L1-BORDER-RBRIDGE    RFC 9183
  257    L1-BORDER-RB-GROUP   RFC 9183

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#section-11 .section}
## [11.](#section-11){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-11.1 .section}
### [11.1.](#section-11.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC6325\]
:   [Perlman, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor},
    [Dutt, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Gai, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [A.
    Ghanwani]{.refAuthor}, [\"Routing Bridges (RBridges): Base Protocol
    Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6325]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6325]{.seriesInfo}, July 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6325>\>.
:   

\[RFC7356\]
:   [Ginsberg, L.]{.refAuthor}, [Previdi, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [Y.
    Yang]{.refAuthor}, [\"IS-IS Flooding Scope Link State PDUs
    (LSPs)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7356]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7356]{.seriesInfo}, September 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7356>\>.
:   

\[RFC7357\]
:   [Zhai, H.]{.refAuthor}, [Hu, F.]{.refAuthor},
    [Perlman, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor}, and [O.
    Stokes]{.refAuthor}, [\"Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links
    (TRILL): End Station Address Distribution Information (ESADI)
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7357]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7357]{.seriesInfo}, September 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7357>\>.
:   

\[RFC7455\]
:   [Senevirathne, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Finn, N.]{.refAuthor},
    [Salam, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Kumar, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Eastlake
    3rd, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Aldrin, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [Y.
    Li]{.refAuthor}, [\"Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links
    (TRILL): Fault Management\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7455]{.seriesInfo},
    [DOI 10.17487/RFC7455]{.seriesInfo}, March 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7455>\>.
:   

\[RFC7780\]
:   [Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Zhang, M.]{.refAuthor},
    [Perlman, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Banerjee, A.]{.refAuthor},
    [Ghanwani, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [S. Gupta]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links (TRILL):
    Clarifications, Corrections, and Updates\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7780]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7780]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2016, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7780>\>.
:   

\[RFC8126\]
:   [Cotton, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, and [T.
    Narten]{.refAuthor}, [\"Guidelines for Writing an IANA
    Considerations Section in RFCs\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 26]{.seriesInfo},
    [RFC 8126]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8126]{.seriesInfo}, June
    2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8126>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8397\]
:   [Zhang, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor},
    [Perlman, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Zhai, H.]{.refAuthor}, and [D.
    Liu]{.refAuthor}, [\"Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links
    (TRILL) Multilevel Using Unique Nicknames\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8397]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8397]{.seriesInfo}, May 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8397>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-11.2 .section}
### [11.2.](#section-11.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[IS-IS\]
:   [International Organization for Standardization]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Information technology \-- Telecommunications and information
    exchange between systems \-- Intermediate System to Intermediate
    System intra-domain routeing information exchange protocol for use
    in conjunction with the protocol for providing the
    connectionless-mode network service (ISO 8473)\"]{.refTitle}, [ISO
    8473]{.refContent}, [ISO/IEC 10589:2002]{.refContent}, [Second
    Edition]{.refContent}, November 2002.
:   

\[RFC5310\]
:   [Bhatia, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Manral, V.]{.refAuthor},
    [Li, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Atkinson, R.]{.refAuthor},
    [White, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [M. Fanto]{.refAuthor}, [\"IS-IS
    Generic Cryptographic Authentication\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5310]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5310]{.seriesInfo}, February
    2009, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5310>\>.
:   

\[RFC8243\]
:   [Perlman, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor},
    [Zhang, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Ghanwani, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [H.
    Zhai]{.refAuthor}, [\"Alternatives for Multilevel Transparent
    Interconnection of Lots of Links (TRILL)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8243]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8243]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8243>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#sect-a}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Appendix A.](#appendix-A){.section-number .selfRef} [Level Transition Clarification](#name-level-transition-clarificat){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-level-transition-clarificat}

It\'s possible that an L1 RBridge is only reachable from a non-DBRB
border RBridge. If this non-DBRB RBridge refrains from Level transition,
the question is, how can a multicast packet reach this L1 RBridge? The
answer is, it will be reached after the DBRB performs the Level
transition and floods the packet using an L1 distribution
tree.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}

Take the following figure as an example. RB77 is reachable from the
border RBridge RB30 while RB3 is the DBRB. RB3 transitions the multicast
packet into L1 and floods the packet on the distribution tree rooted
from RB3. This packet is finally flooded to RB77 via
RB30.[¶](#appendix-A-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#appendix-A-3 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
           Area{3,30}
         +--------------+          (root) RB3 o
         |              |                      \
    -RB3 |              |                       o RB30
      |  |              |                      /
    -RB30-RB77          |                RB77 o
         +--------------+

         Example Topology               L1 Tree

[¶](#appendix-A-3){.pilcrow}
:::

In the above example, the multicast packet is forwarded along a
non-optimal path. A possible improvement is to have RB3 configured not
to belong to this area. In this way, RB30 will surely act as the DBRB to
do the Level transition.[¶](#appendix-A-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mingui Zhang]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Independent]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Beijing]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[China]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <zhangmingui@qq.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Donald E. Eastlake, 3rd]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Futurewei Technologies]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[2386 Panoramic Circle]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Apopka]{.locality}, [FL]{.region} [32703]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+1-508-333-2270](tel:+1-508-333-2270){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <d3e3e3@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Radia Perlman]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[EMC]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[2010 256th Avenue NE, #200]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Bellevue]{.locality}, [WA]{.region} [98007]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <radia@alum.mit.edu>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Margaret Cullen]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Painless Security]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[356 Abbott Street]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[North Andover]{.locality}, [MA]{.region} [01845]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+1-781-405-7464](tel:+1-781-405-7464){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <margaret@painless-security.com>
:::

::: url
URI: <https://www.painless-security.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Hongjun Zhai]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jinling Institute of Technology]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[99 Hongjing Avenue, Jiangning District]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Nanjing]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jiangsu]{.region}, [211169]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[China]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <honjun.zhai@tom.com>
:::
:::
:::
