  RFC 9187   Sequence Number Extension   January 2022
  ---------- --------------------------- --------------
  Touch      Informational               \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Independent Submission

RFC:
:   [9187](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9187){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   January 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Author:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Touch
    :::

    ::: org
    Independent Consultant
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9187 {#rfcnum}

# Sequence Number Extension for Windowed Protocols {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

Sliding window protocols use finite sequence numbers to determine
segment placement and order. These sequence number spaces wrap around
and are reused during the operation of such protocols. This document
describes a way to extend the size of these sequence numbers at the
endpoints to avoid the impact of that wrap and reuse without
transmitting additional information in the packet header. The resulting
extended sequence numbers can be used at the endpoints in encryption and
authentication algorithms to ensure input bit patterns do not repeat
over the lifetime of a connection.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This is a contribution to the RFC Series, independently of any other RFC
stream. The RFC Editor has chosen to publish this document at its
discretion and makes no statement about its value for implementation or
deployment. Documents approved for publication by the RFC Editor are not
candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9187>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Background](#name-background){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Related
    Discussion](#name-related-discussion){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Using SNE in Protocol
    Design](#name-using-sne-in-protocol-desig){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Example Code](#name-example-code){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Validation
    Suite](#name-validation-suite){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Informative
    References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Author\'s
    Address](#name-authors-address){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-1}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

Protocols use sequence numbers to maintain ordering and, in sliding
window systems, to control the amount of outstanding unacknowledged
information. These sequence numbers are finite and thus commonly wrap
around during long connections, reusing past
values.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

It can be useful for protocols to keep track of this wrap around in a
separate counter, such that the sequence number and counter together
form an equivalent number space that need not wrap. This technique was
introduced as \"Sequence Number Extension\" in the TCP Authentication
Option (TCP-AO) \[[RFC5925](#RFC5925){.xref}\]. The example provided
there was intended to introduce the concept, but the pseudocode provided
is not complete.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

This document presents the formal requirements for Sequence Number
Extension (SNE), a code example, and a check sequence that can be used
to validate this and alternate implementations. Sequence numbers are
used in a variety of protocols to support loss detection, reordering,
flow control, and congestion control. Limitations in the size of a
sequence number protocol field can limit the ways in which these
capabilities can be supported.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Under certain conditions, it is possible for both endpoints of a
protocol to keep track of sequence number rollover and effectively
extend the sequence number space without requiring modification of the
sequence number field used within protocol messages. These conditions
assume that the received sequence numbers never vary by more than half
the size of the space of the field used in messages, i.e., they never
hop forward or backward by more than half that space. This constraint is
typical in sliding window protocols, such as TCP. However, although both
ends can track rollover unambiguously, doing so can be surprisingly
complex. This document provides examples and test cases to simplify that
process.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

This document is intended for protocol designers who seek to use larger
sequence numbers at the endpoints without needing to extend the sequence
number field used in messages, such as for authentication protocols,
e.g., TCP-AO \[[RFC5925](#RFC5925){.xref}\]. Use of extended sequence
numbers should be part of a protocol specification so that both
endpoints can ensure they comply with the requirements needed to enable
their use in both locations.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

The remainder of this document describes how SNE can be supported and
provides the pseudocode to demonstrate how received messages can
unambiguously determine the appropriate extension value, as long as the
reordering is constrained. [Section 2](#sect-2){.xref} provides
background on the concept. [Section 3](#sect-3){.xref} discusses
currently known uses of SNE. [Section 4](#sect-4){.xref} discusses how
SNE is used in protocol design and how it differs from in-band use of
sequence numbers. [Section 5](#sect-5){.xref} provides a framework for
testing SNE implementations, including example code for the SNE
function, and [Section 6](#sect-6){.xref} provides a sequence that can
be used by that code for validation. [Section 7](#sect-7){.xref}
concludes with a discussion of security
issues.[¶](#section-1-6){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-2}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Background](#name-background){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-background}

Protocols use sequence numbers to maintain message order. The
transmitter typically increments them either once per message or by the
length of the message. The receiver uses them to reorder messages and
detect gaps due to inferred loss.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

Sequence numbers are represented within those messages (e.g., in the
headers) as values of a finite, unsigned number space. This space is
typically represented in a fixed-length bit string, whose values range
from 0..(2^N^)-1, inclusive.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

The use of finite representations has repercussions on the use of these
values at both the transmitter and receiver. Without additional
constraints, when the number space \"wraps around\", it would be
impossible for the receiver to distinguish between the uses of the same
value.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

As a consequence, additional constraints are required. Transmitters are
typically required to limit reuse until they can assume that receivers
would successfully differentiate the two uses of the same value. The
receiver always interprets values it sees based on the assumption that
successive values never differ by just under half the number space. A
receiver cannot detect an error in that sequence, but it will
incorrectly interpret numbers if reordering violates this
constraint.[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

The constraint requires that \"forward\" values advance the values by
less than half the sequence number space, ensuring that receivers never
experience a series of values that violate that
rule.[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}

We define a sequence space as follows:[¶](#section-2-6){.pilcrow}

-   [An unsigned integer within the range of 0..(2^N^)-1, i.e., for N
    bits.[¶](#section-2-7.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-7.1}
-   [An operation that increments values in that space by K, where K \<
    2^(N-1)^, i.e., less than half the range. This operation is used
    exclusively by the
    transmitter.[¶](#section-2-7.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-7.2}
-   [An operation that compares two values in that space to determine
    their order, e.g., where X \< Y implies that X comes before
    Y.[¶](#section-2-7.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-2-7.3}

We assume that both sides begin with the same initial value, which can
be anywhere in the space. That value is either assumed (e.g., 0) before
the protocol begins or coordinated before other messages are exchanged
(as with TCP Initial Sequence Numbers (ISNs)
\[[RFC0793](#RFC0793){.xref}\]). It is assumed that the receiver always
receives values that are always within (2^N^)-1, but the successive
received values never jump forward or backward by more than 2^(N-1)^-1,
i.e., just under half the range.[¶](#section-2-8){.pilcrow}

No other operations are supported. The transmitter is not permitted to
\"backup\", such that values are always used in \"increment\" order. The
receiver cannot experience loss or gaps larger than 2^(N-1)^-1, which is
typically enforced either by assumption or by explicit endpoint
coordination.[¶](#section-2-9){.pilcrow}

An SNE is a separate number space that can be combined with the sequence
number to create a larger number space that need not wrap around during
a connection.[¶](#section-2-10){.pilcrow}

On the transmit side, SNE is trivially accomplished by incrementing a
local counter once each time the sequence number increment \"wraps\"
around or by keeping a larger local sequence number whose
least-significant part is the message sequence number and
most-significant part can be considered the SNE. The transmitter
typically does not need to maintain an SNE except when used in local
computations, such as for Message Authentication Codes (MACs) in TCP-AO
\[[RFC5925](#RFC5925){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-11){.pilcrow}

The goal of this document is to demonstrate that SNE can be accomplished
on the receiver side without transmitting additional information in
messages. It defines the stateful function compute_sne() as
follows:[¶](#section-2-12){.pilcrow}

SNE = compute_sne(seqno)[¶](#section-2-13){.pilcrow}

The compute_sne() function accepts the sequence number seen in a
received message and computes the corresponding SNE. The function
includes persistent local state that tracks the largest currently
received SNE and seqno combination. The concatenation of SNE and seqno
emulates the equivalent larger sequence number space that can avoid wrap
around.[¶](#section-2-14){.pilcrow}

Note that the function defined here is capable of receiving any series
of seqno values and computing their correct corresponding SNE, as long
as the series never \"jumps\" more than half the number space
\"backward\" from the largest value seen
\"forward\".[¶](#section-2-15){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-3}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Related Discussion](#name-related-discussion){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-related-discussion}

The DNS uses sequence numbers to determine when a Start of Authority
(SOA) serial number is more recent than a previous one, even considering
sequence space wrap
\[[RFC1034](#RFC1034){.xref}\]\[[RFC1035](#RFC1035){.xref}\]. The use of
wrapped sequence numbers for sliding windows in network protocols was
first described as a sequence number space
\[[IEN74](#IEN74){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

A more recent discussion describes this as \"serial number arithmetic\"
and defines a comparison operator it claimed was missing in IEN-74
\[[RFC1982](#RFC1982){.xref}\]. That document defines two operations:
addition (presumably shifting the window forward) and comparison
(defining the order of two values). Addition is defined in that document
as limited to values within the range of 0..windowsize/2-1. Comparison
is defined in that document by a set of equations therein, but that
document does not provide a way for a receiver to compute the correct
equivalent SNE, especially including the potential for sequence number
reordering, as is demonstrated in this
document.[¶](#section-3-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-4}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Using SNE in Protocol Design](#name-using-sne-in-protocol-desig){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-using-sne-in-protocol-desig}

As noted in the introduction, message sequence numbers enable
reordering, loss detection, flow control, and congestion control. They
are also used to differentiate otherwise potentially identical messages
that might repeat as part of a sequence or
stream.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

The size of the sequence number field used within transferred messages
defines the ability of a protocol to tolerate reordering and gaps,
notably limited to half the space of that field. For example, a field of
8 bits can reorder and detect losses of smaller than 2^7^, i.e., 127
messages. When used for these purposes \-- reordering, loss detection,
flow control, and congestion control \-- the size of the field defines
the limits of those capabilities.[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}

Sequence numbers are also used to differentiate messages; when used this
way, they can be problematic if they repeat for otherwise identical
messages. Protocols using sequence numbers tolerate that repetition
because they are aware of the rollover of these sequence number spaces
at both endpoints. In some cases, it can be useful to track this
rollover and use the rollover count as an extension to the sequence
number, e.g., to differentiate authentication MACs. This SNE is never
transmitted in messages; the existing rules of sequence numbers ensure
both ends can keep track unambiguously \-- both for new messages and
reordered messages.[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}

The constraints required to use SNE have already been presented as
background in [Section 2](#sect-2){.xref}. The transmitter must never
send messages out of sequence beyond half the range of the sequence
number field used in messages. A receiver uses this assumption to
interpret whether received numbers are part of pre-wrap sequences or
post-wrap sequences. Note that a receiver cannot enforce or detect if
the transmitter has violated these assumptions on its own; it relies on
explicit coordination to ensure this property is maintained, such as the
exchange of acknowledgements.[¶](#section-4-4){.pilcrow}

SNEs are intended for use when it is helpful for both ends to
unambiguously determine whether the sequence number in a message has
wrapped and whether a received message is pre-wrap or post-wrap for each
such wrap. This can be used by both endpoints to ensure all messages of
arbitrarily long sequences can be differentiated, e.g., ensuring unique
MACs.[¶](#section-4-5){.pilcrow}

SNE does not extend the actual sequence space of a protocol or (thus)
its tolerance to reordering or gaps. It also cannot improve its dynamic
range for flow control or congestion control, although there are other
somewhat related methods that can, such as window scaling
\[[RFC7323](#RFC7323){.xref}\] (which increases range at the expense of
granularity).[¶](#section-4-6){.pilcrow}

SNE is not needed if messages are already unique over the entirety of a
transfer sequence, e.g., either because the sequence number field used
in its messages never wrap around or because other fields provide that
disambiguation, such as timestamps.[¶](#section-4-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-5}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Example Code](#name-example-code){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-example-code}

The following C code is provided as a verified example of SNE from 16 to
32 bits. The code includes both the framework used for validation and
the compute_sne() function, the latter of which can be used
operationally.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

A correct test will indicate \"OK\" for each test. An incorrect test
will indicate \"ERROR\" where applicable.[¶](#section-5-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5-3}
``` {.lang-c .sourcecode}
<CODE BEGINS> file "compute_sne.c"

#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/param.h>

#define distance(x,y)   (((x)<(y))?((y)-(x)):((x)-(y)))

#define SNEDEBUG 1

// This is the core code, stand-alone, to compute SNE from seqno
// >> replace this function with your own code to test alternates
unsigned long compute_sne(unsigned long seqno) {
    // INPUT: 32-bit unsigned sequence number (low bits)
    // OUTPUT: 32-bit unsigned SNE (high bits)

    // variables used in this code example to compute SNE:

    static unsigned long
      RCV_SNE = 0;        // high-watermark SNE
    static int
      RCV_SNE_FLAG = 1;   // set during first half rollover
                          // (prevents re-rollover)
    static unsigned long
      RCV_PREV_SEQ = 0;   // high-watermark SEQ
    unsigned long
      holdSNE;            // temp copy of output

    holdSNE = RCV_SNE;                // use current SNE to start
    if (distance(seqno,RCV_PREV_SEQ) < 0x80000000) {
        // both in same SNE range?
        if ((seqno >= 0x80000000) && (RCV_PREV_SEQ < 0x80000000)) {
            // jumps fwd over N/2?
            RCV_SNE_FLAG = 0;         // reset wrap increment flag
        }
        RCV_PREV_SEQ = MAX(seqno,RCV_PREV_SEQ);
                                      // move prev forward if needed
    } else {
            // both in diff SNE ranges
            if (seqno < 0x80000000) {
                // jumps forward over zero?
                RCV_PREV_SEQ = seqno; // update prev
                if (RCV_SNE_FLAG == 0) {
                    // first jump over zero? (wrap)
                    RCV_SNE_FLAG = 1;
                              // set flag so we increment once
                    RCV_SNE = RCV_SNE + 1;
                              // increment window
                    holdSNE = RCV_SNE;
                              // use updated SNE value
                }
            } else {
                // jump backward over zero
                holdSNE = RCV_SNE - 1;
                              // use pre-rollover SNE value
            }
    }
    #ifdef SNEDEBUG
    fprintf(stderr,"state RCV_SNE_FLAG =        %1d\n",
      RCV_SNE_FLAG);
    fprintf(stderr,"state      RCV_SNE = %08lx\n", RCV_SNE);
    fprintf(stderr,"state RCV_PREV_SEQ = %08lx\n", RCV_PREV_SEQ);
    #endif
    return holdSNE;
}

int main() {
    // variables used as input and output:
    unsigned long SEG_SEQ;        // input - received SEQ
    unsigned long SNE;            // output - SNE corresponding
                                  // to received SEQ

    // variables used to validate the computed SNE:
    unsigned long SEG_HIGH;       // input - xmitter side SNE
                                  // -> SNE should match this value
    unsigned long long BIG_PREV;  // prev 64-bit total seqno
    unsigned long long BIG_THIS = 0;  // current 64-bit total seqno
                                  // -> THIS, PREV should never jump
                                  //    more than half the SEQ space

   char *prompt = "Input hex numbers only (0x is optional)\n\n")
                  "\tHex input\n"
                  "\t(2 hex numbers separated by whitespace,"
                  "each with 8 or fewer digits)";

    fprintf(stderr,"%s\n",prompt);

    while (scanf("%lx %lx",&SEG_HIGH,&SEG_SEQ) == 2) {
        BIG_PREV = BIG_THIS;
        BIG_THIS = (((unsigned long long)SEG_HIGH) << 32)
                  | ((unsigned long long)SEG_SEQ);

        // given SEG_SEQ, compute SNE
        SNE = compute_sne(SEG_SEQ);

        fprintf(stderr,"           SEG_SEQ = %08lx\n", SEG_SEQ);
        fprintf(stderr,"               SNE = %08lx\n", SNE);
        fprintf(stderr,"          SEG_HIGH = %08lx %s\n",SEG_HIGH,
                (SEG_HIGH == SNE)? " - OK" : " - ERROR !!!!!!!");
        fprintf(stderr,"\t\tthe jump was %16llx %s %s\n",
                distance(BIG_PREV,BIG_THIS),
                ((BIG_PREV < BIG_THIS)?"+":"-"),
                (((distance(BIG_PREV,BIG_THIS)) > 0x7FFFFFFF)
                 ? "ILLEGAL JUMP" : "."));
        fprintf(stderr,"\n");
        fprintf(stderr,"\n");

        fprintf(stderr,"%s\n",prompt);

    }
}

<CODE ENDS>
```

[¶](#section-5-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-6}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Validation Suite](#name-validation-suite){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-validation-suite}

The following numbers are used to validate SNE variants and are shown in
the order they legitimately could be received. Each line represents a
single 64-bit number, represented as two hexadecimal 32-bit numbers with
a space between. The numbers are formatted for use in the example code
provided in [Section 5](#sect-5){.xref}.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

A correctly operating extended sequence number system can receive the
least-significant half (the right side) and compute the correct
most-significant half (the left side) correctly. It specifically tests
both forward and backward jumps in received values that represent
legitimate reordering.[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-6-3}
``` {.lang-test-vector .sourcecode}
00000000 00000000
00000000 30000000
00000000 90000000
00000000 70000000
00000000 a0000000
00000001 00000001
00000000 e0000000
00000001 00000000
00000001 7fffffff
00000001 00000000
00000001 50000000
00000001 80000000
00000001 00000001
00000001 40000000
00000001 90000000
00000001 b0000000
00000002 0fffffff
00000002 20000000
00000002 90000000
00000002 70000000
00000002 A0000000
00000003 00004000
00000002 D0000000
00000003 20000000
00000003 90000000
00000003 70000000
00000003 A0000000
00000004 00004000
00000003 D0000000
```

[¶](#section-6-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#sect-7}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

Sequence numbers and their extensions can be useful in a variety of
security contexts. Because the extension part (most-significant half) is
determined by the previously exchanged sequence values
(least-significant half), the extension should not be considered as
adding entropy for the purposes of message authentication or
encryption.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#sect-8}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[IEN74\]
:   [Plummmer, W.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Sequence Number
    Arithmetic\"]{.refTitle}, [IEN-74]{.refContent}, September 1978.
:   

\[RFC0793\]
:   [Postel, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Transmission Control
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 7]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    793]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC0793]{.seriesInfo}, September
    1981, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc793>\>.
:   

\[RFC1034\]
:   [Mockapetris, P.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Domain names - concepts and
    facilities\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 13]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    1034]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC1034]{.seriesInfo}, November
    1987, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1034>\>.
:   

\[RFC1035\]
:   [Mockapetris, P.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Domain names - implementation and
    specification\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 13]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    1035]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC1035]{.seriesInfo}, November
    1987, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1035>\>.
:   

\[RFC1982\]
:   [Elz, R.]{.refAuthor} and [R. Bush]{.refAuthor}, [\"Serial Number
    Arithmetic\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 1982]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC1982]{.seriesInfo}, August 1996,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1982>\>.
:   

\[RFC5925\]
:   [Touch, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Mankin, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [R.
    Bonica]{.refAuthor}, [\"The TCP Authentication Option\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 5925]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5925]{.seriesInfo}, June
    2010, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5925>\>.
:   

\[RFC7323\]
:   [Borman, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Braden, B.]{.refAuthor},
    [Jacobson, V.]{.refAuthor}, and [R. Scheffenegger, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"TCP Extensions for High Performance\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    7323]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7323]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2014, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7323>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#sect-10}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

The need for this document was first noted by [Juhamatti
Kuusisaari]{.contact-name} in April 2020 during discussions of the
pseudocode in RFC 5925.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Author\'s Address](#name-authors-address){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-address}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Joe Touch]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Manhattan Beach]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [90266]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: tel
Phone: [+1 (310) 560-0334](tel:+1%20(310)%20560-0334){.tel}
:::

::: email
Email: <touch@strayalpha.com>
:::
:::
:::
