  RFC 9191        Certificates in TLS-Based EAP Methods   February 2022
  --------------- --------------------------------------- ---------------
  Sethi, et al.   Informational                           \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9191](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9191){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   February 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    M. Sethi
    :::

    ::: org
    Ericsson
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Preuß Mattsson
    :::

    ::: org
    Ericsson
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    S. Turner
    :::

    ::: org
    sn3rd
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9191 {#rfcnum}

# Handling Large Certificates and Long Certificate Chains in TLS‑Based EAP Methods {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), defined in RFC 3748,
provides a standard mechanism for support of multiple authentication
methods. EAP-TLS and other TLS-based EAP methods are widely deployed and
used for network access authentication. Large certificates and long
certificate chains combined with authenticators that drop an EAP session
after only 40 - 50 round trips is a major deployment problem. This
document looks at this problem in detail and describes the potential
solutions available.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Not all documents approved
by the IESG are candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see
Section 2 of RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9191>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal
Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the Revised
BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Experience with
    Deployments](#name-experience-with-deployments){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Handling of Large Certificates and Long
    Certificate Chains](#name-handling-of-large-certifica){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1}
        [4.1](#section-4.1){.xref}.  [Updating Certificates and
        Certificate Chains](#name-updating-certificates-and-c){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.2.1}
            [4.1.1](#section-4.1.1){.xref}.  [Guidelines for
            Certificates](#name-guidelines-for-certificates){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.2.2}
            [4.1.2](#section-4.1.2){.xref}.  [Pre-distributing and
            Omitting CA
            Certificates](#name-pre-distributing-and-omitti){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.1.2.3}
            [4.1.3](#section-4.1.3){.xref}.  [Using Fewer Intermediate
            Certificates](#name-using-fewer-intermediate-ce){.xref}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2}
        [4.2](#section-4.2){.xref}.  [Updating TLS and EAP-TLS
        Code](#name-updating-tls-and-eap-tls-co){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.2.1}
            [4.2.1](#section-4.2.1){.xref}.  [URLs for Client
            Certificates](#name-urls-for-client-certificate){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.2.2}
            [4.2.2](#section-4.2.2){.xref}.  [Caching
            Certificates](#name-caching-certificates){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.2.3}
            [4.2.3](#section-4.2.3){.xref}.  [Compressing
            Certificates](#name-compressing-certificates){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.2.4}
            [4.2.4](#section-4.2.4){.xref}.  [Compact TLS
            1.3](#name-compact-tls-13){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.2.5}
            [4.2.5](#section-4.2.5){.xref}.  [Suppressing Intermediate
            Certificates](#name-suppressing-intermediate-ce){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.2.6}
            [4.2.6](#section-4.2.6){.xref}.  [Raw Public
            Keys](#name-raw-public-keys){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.2.2.7}
            [4.2.7](#section-4.2.7){.xref}.  [New Certificate Types and
            Compression
            Algorithms](#name-new-certificate-types-and-c){.xref}
            :::
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4.2.3}
        [4.3](#section-4.3){.xref}.  [Updating
        Authenticators](#name-updating-authenticators){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2}
        [7.2](#section-7.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), defined in
\[[RFC3748](#RFC3748){.xref}\], provides a standard mechanism for
support of multiple authentication methods. EAP-TLS
\[[RFC5216](#RFC5216){.xref}\] \[[RFC9190](#RFC9190){.xref}\] relies on
TLS \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] to provide strong mutual
authentication with certificates \[[RFC5280](#RFC5280){.xref}\] and is
widely deployed and often used for network access authentication. There
are also many other standardized TLS-based EAP methods such as Flexible
Authentication via Secure Tunneling (EAP-FAST)
\[[RFC4851](#RFC4851){.xref}\], Tunneled Transport Layer Security
(EAP-TTLS) \[[RFC5281](#RFC5281){.xref}\], the Tunnel Extensible
Authentication Protocol (TEAP) \[[RFC7170](#RFC7170){.xref}\], as well
as several vendor-specific EAP methods such as the Protected Extensible
Authentication Protocol (PEAP)
\[[PEAP](#PEAP){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

Certificates in EAP deployments can be relatively large, and the
certificate chains can be long. Unlike the use of TLS on the web, where
typically only the TLS server is authenticated, EAP-TLS deployments
typically authenticate both the EAP peer and the EAP server. Also, from
deployment experience, EAP peers typically have longer certificate
chains than servers. This is because EAP peers often follow
organizational hierarchies and tend to have many intermediate
certificates. Thus, EAP-TLS authentication usually involves exchange of
significantly more octets than when TLS is used as part of
HTTPS.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

[Section
3.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3748#section-3.1){.relref} of
\[[RFC3748](#RFC3748){.xref}\] states that EAP implementations can
assume a Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) of at least 1020 octets from
lower layers. The EAP fragment size in typical deployments is just 1020
- 1500 octets (since the maximum Ethernet frame size is \~ 1500 bytes).
Thus, EAP-TLS authentication needs to be fragmented into many smaller
packets for transportation over the lower layers. Such fragmentation not
only can negatively affect the latency, but also results in other
challenges. For example, some EAP authenticator (e.g., an access point)
implementations will drop an EAP session if it has not finished after 40
- 50 round trips. This is a major problem and means that, in many
situations, the EAP peer cannot perform network access authentication
even though both the sides have valid credentials for successful
authentication and key derivation.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

Not all EAP deployments are constrained by the MTU of the lower layer.
For example, some implementations support EAP over Ethernet \"jumbo\"
frames that can easily allow very large EAP packets. Larger packets will
naturally help lower the number of round trips required for successful
EAP-TLS authentication. However, deployment experience has shown that
these jumbo frames are not always implemented correctly. Additionally,
EAP fragment size is also restricted by protocols such as RADIUS
\[[RFC2865](#RFC2865){.xref}\], which are responsible for transporting
EAP messages between an authenticator and an EAP server. RADIUS can
generally transport only about 4000 octets of EAP in a single message
(the maximum length of a RADIUS packet is restricted to 4096 octets in
\[[RFC2865](#RFC2865){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

This document looks at related work and potential tools available for
overcoming the deployment challenges induced by large certificates and
long certificate chains. It then discusses the solutions available to
overcome these challenges. Many of the solutions require TLS 1.3
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]. The IETF has standardized EAP-TLS 1.3
\[[RFC9190](#RFC9190){.xref}\] and is working on specifications such as
\[[TLS-EAP-TYPES](#TLS-EAP-TYPES){.xref}\] for how other TLS-based EAP
methods use TLS 1.3.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

Readers are expected to be familiar with the terms and concepts used in
EAP \[[RFC3748](#RFC3748){.xref}\], EAP-TLS
\[[RFC5216](#RFC5216){.xref}\], and TLS \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\].
In particular, this document frequently uses the following terms as they
have been defined in
\[[RFC5216](#RFC5216){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Authenticator:
:   The entity initiating EAP authentication. Typically implemented as
    part of a network switch or a wireless access
    point.[¶](#section-2-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

EAP peer:
:   The entity that responds to the authenticator. In
    \[[IEEE-802.1X](#IEEE-802.1X){.xref}\], this entity is known as the
    supplicant. In EAP-TLS, the EAP peer implements the TLS client
    role.[¶](#section-2-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

EAP server:
:   The entity that terminates the EAP authentication method with the
    peer. In the case where no backend authentication server is used,
    the EAP server is part of the authenticator. In the case where the
    authenticator operates in pass-through mode, the EAP server is
    located on the backend authentication server. In EAP-TLS, the EAP
    server implements the TLS server role.[¶](#section-2-3.6){.pilcrow}
:   

The document additionally uses the terms \"trust anchor\" and
\"certification path\" defined in
\[[RFC5280](#RFC5280){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Experience with Deployments](#name-experience-with-deployments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-experience-with-deployments}

As stated earlier, the EAP fragment size in typical deployments is just
1020 - 1500 octets. A certificate can, however, be large for a number of
reasons:[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

-   [It can have a long Subject Alternative Name
    field.[¶](#section-3-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.1}
-   [It can have long Public Key and Signature
    fields.[¶](#section-3-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.2}
-   [It can contain multiple object identifiers (OIDs) that indicate the
    permitted uses of the certificate as noted in [Section
    5.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5216#section-5.3){.relref} of
    \[[RFC5216](#RFC5216){.xref}\]. Most implementations verify the
    presence of these OIDs for successful
    authentication.[¶](#section-3-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.3}
-   [It can contain multiple organization naming fields to reflect the
    multiple group memberships of a user (in a client
    certificate).[¶](#section-3-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-3-2.4}

A certificate chain (called a certification path in
\[[RFC5280](#RFC5280){.xref}\]) in EAP-TLS can commonly have 2 - 6
intermediate certificates between the end-entity certificate and the
trust anchor.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}

The size of certificates (and certificate chains) may also increase
manyfold in the future with the introduction of post-quantum
cryptography. For example, lattice-based cryptography would have public
keys of approximately 1000 bytes and signatures of approximately 2000
bytes.[¶](#section-3-4){.pilcrow}

Many access point implementations drop EAP sessions that do not complete
within 40 - 50 round trips. This means that if the chain is larger than
\~ 60 kilobytes, EAP-TLS authentication cannot complete successfully in
most deployments.[¶](#section-3-5){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#handle-large-cert-long-chain}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Handling of Large Certificates and Long Certificate Chains](#name-handling-of-large-certifica){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-handling-of-large-certifica}

This section discusses some possible alternatives for overcoming the
challenge of large certificates and long certificate chains in EAP-TLS
authentication. [Section 4.1](#update-certs){.xref} considers
recommendations that require an update of the certificates or
certificate chains used for EAP-TLS authentication without requiring
changes to the existing EAP-TLS code base. It also provides some
guidelines that should be followed when issuing certificates for use
with EAP-TLS. [Section 4.2](#update-code){.xref} considers
recommendations that rely on updates to the EAP-TLS implementations and
can be deployed with existing certificates. Finally, [Section
4.3](#update-APs){.xref} briefly discusses what could be done to update
or reconfigure authenticators when it is infeasible to replace deployed
components giving a solution that can be deployed without changes to
existing certificates or code.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#update-certs}
::: {#section-4.1 .section}
### [4.1.](#section-4.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Updating Certificates and Certificate Chains](#name-updating-certificates-and-c){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-updating-certificates-and-c}

Many IETF protocols now use elliptic curve cryptography (ECC)
\[[RFC6090](#RFC6090){.xref}\] for the underlying cryptographic
operations. The use of ECC can reduce the size of certificates and
signatures. For example, at a 128-bit security level, the size of a
public key with traditional RSA is about 384 bytes, while the size of a
public key with ECC is only 32-64 bytes. Similarly, the size of a
digital signature with traditional RSA is 384 bytes, while the size is
only 64 bytes with the elliptic curve digital signature algorithm
(ECDSA) and the Edwards-curve digital signature algorithm (EdDSA)
\[[RFC8032](#RFC8032){.xref}\]. Using certificates that use ECC can
reduce the number of messages in EAP-TLS authentication, which can
alleviate the problem of authenticators dropping an EAP session because
of too many round trips. In the absence of a standard application
profile specifying otherwise, TLS 1.3 \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]
requires implementations to support ECC. New cipher suites that use ECC
are also specified for TLS 1.2 \[[RFC8422](#RFC8422){.xref}\]. Using
ECC-based cipher suites with existing code can significantly reduce the
number of messages in a single EAP session.[¶](#section-4.1-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#cert-guide}
::: {#section-4.1.1 .section}
#### [4.1.1.](#section-4.1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Guidelines for Certificates](#name-guidelines-for-certificates){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-guidelines-for-certificates}

The general guideline of keeping the certificate size small by not
populating fields with excessive information can help avert the problems
of failed EAP-TLS authentication. More specific recommendations for
certificates used with EAP-TLS are as
follows:[¶](#section-4.1.1-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-4.1.1-2.1}
    Object Identifier (OID) is an ASN.1 data type that defines unique
    identifiers for objects. The OID\'s ASN.1 value, which is a string
    of integers, is then used to name objects to which they relate. The
    Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER) specify that the first two
    integers always occupy one octet and subsequent integers are
    base-128 encoded in the fewest possible octets. OIDs are used
    lavishly in X.509 certificates \[[RFC5280](#RFC5280){.xref}\] and
    while not all can be avoided, e.g., OIDs for extensions or
    algorithms and their associate parameters, some are well within the
    certificate issuer\'s control:[¶](#section-4.1.1-2.1.1){.pilcrow}

    -   [Each naming attribute in a DN (Distinguished Name) has one. DNs
        are used in the issuer and subject fields as well as numerous
        extensions. A shallower name will be smaller, e.g., C=FI,
        O=Example, SN=B0A123499EFC as against C=FI, O=Example,
        OU=Division 1, SOPN=Southern Finland, CN=Coolest IoT Gadget
        Ever, and
        SN=B0A123499EFC.[¶](#section-4.1.1-2.1.2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.1.1-2.1.2.1}
    -   [Every certificate policy (and qualifier) and any mappings to
        another policy uses identifiers. Consider carefully what
        policies
        apply.[¶](#section-4.1.1-2.1.2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.1.1-2.1.2.2}
    :::

-   [DirectoryString and GeneralName types are used extensively to name
    things, e.g., the DN naming attribute O= (the organizational naming
    attribute) DirectoryString includes \"Example\" for the Example
    organization and uniformResourceIdentifier can be used to indicate
    the location of the Certificate Revocation List (CRL), e.g.,
    \"http://crl.example.com/sfig2s1-128.crl\", in the CRL Distribution
    Point extension. For these particular examples, each character is a
    single byte. For some non-ASCII character strings, characters can be
    several bytes. Obviously, the names need to be unique, but there is
    more than one way to accomplish this without long strings. This is
    especially true if the names are not meant to be meaningful to
    users.[¶](#section-4.1.1-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.1.1-2.2}

-   [Extensions are necessary to comply with
    \[[RFC5280](#RFC5280){.xref}\], but the vast majority are optional.
    Include only those that are necessary to
    operate.[¶](#section-4.1.1-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.1.1-2.3}

-   [As stated earlier, certificate chains of the EAP peer often follow
    organizational hierarchies. In such cases, information in
    intermediate certificates (such as postal addresses) do not provide
    any additional value and they can be shortened (for example, only
    including the department name instead of the full postal
    address).[¶](#section-4.1.1-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4.1.1-2.4}
:::
:::

::: {#section-4.1.2 .section}
#### [4.1.2.](#section-4.1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Pre-distributing and Omitting CA Certificates](#name-pre-distributing-and-omitti){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-pre-distributing-and-omitti}

The TLS Certificate message conveys the sending endpoint\'s certificate
chain. TLS allows endpoints to reduce the size of the Certificate
message by omitting certificates that the other endpoint is known to
possess. When using TLS 1.3, all certificates that specify a trust
anchor known by the other endpoint may be omitted (see [Section
4.4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446#section-4.4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\]). When using TLS 1.2 or earlier, only the
self-signed certificate that specifies the root certificate authority
may be omitted (see [Section
7.4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5246#section-7.4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC5246](#RFC5246){.xref}\]). Therefore, updating TLS implementations
to version 1.3 can help to significantly reduce the number of messages
exchanged for EAP-TLS authentication. The omitted certificates need to
be pre-distributed independently of TLS, and the TLS implementations
need to be configured to omit these pre-distributed
certificates.[¶](#section-4.1.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.1.3 .section}
#### [4.1.3.](#section-4.1.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Using Fewer Intermediate Certificates](#name-using-fewer-intermediate-ce){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-using-fewer-intermediate-ce}

The EAP peer certificate chain does not have to mirror the
organizational hierarchy. For successful EAP-TLS authentication,
certificate chains [SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14} contain more than 4 intermediate
certificates.[¶](#section-4.1.3-1){.pilcrow}

Administrators responsible for deployments using TLS-based EAP methods
can examine the certificate chains and make rough calculations about the
number of round trips required for successful authentication. For
example, dividing the total size of all the certificates in the peer and
server certificate chain (in bytes) by 1020 bytes will indicate the
number of round trips required. If this number exceeds 50, then
administrators can expect failures with many common authenticator
implementations.[¶](#section-4.1.3-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#update-code}
::: {#section-4.2 .section}
### [4.2.](#section-4.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Updating TLS and EAP-TLS Code](#name-updating-tls-and-eap-tls-co){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-updating-tls-and-eap-tls-co}

This section discusses how the fragmentation problem can be avoided by
updating the underlying TLS or EAP-TLS implementation. Note that in some
cases, the new feature may already be implemented in the underlying
library and simply needs to be enabled.[¶](#section-4.2-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-4.2.1 .section}
#### [4.2.1.](#section-4.2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [URLs for Client Certificates](#name-urls-for-client-certificate){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-urls-for-client-certificate}

\[[RFC6066](#RFC6066){.xref}\] defines the \"client_certificate_url\"
extension, which allows TLS clients to send a sequence of Uniform
Resource Locators (URLs) instead of the client certificate chain. URLs
can refer to a single certificate or a certificate chain. Using this
extension can curtail the amount of fragmentation in EAP deployments
thereby allowing EAP sessions to successfully
complete.[¶](#section-4.2.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.2.2 .section}
#### [4.2.2.](#section-4.2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Caching Certificates](#name-caching-certificates){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-caching-certificates}

The TLS Cached Information Extension \[[RFC7924](#RFC7924){.xref}\]
specifies an extension where a server can exclude transmission of
certificate information cached in an earlier TLS handshake. The client
and the server would first execute the full TLS handshake. The client
would then cache the certificate provided by the server. When the TLS
client later connects to the same TLS server without using session
resumption, it can attach the \"cached_info\" extension to the
ClientHello message. This would allow the client to indicate that it has
cached the certificate. The client would also include a fingerprint of
the server certificate chain. If the server\'s certificate has not
changed, then the server does not need to send its certificate and the
corresponding certificate chain again. In case information has changed,
which can be seen from the fingerprint provided by the client, the
certificate payload is transmitted to the client to allow the client to
update the cache. The extension, however, necessitates a successful full
handshake before any caching. This extension can be useful when, for
example, a successful authentication between an EAP peer and EAP server
has occurred in the home network. If authenticators in a roaming network
are stricter at dropping long EAP sessions, an EAP peer can use the
Cached Information Extension to reduce the total number of
messages.[¶](#section-4.2.2-1){.pilcrow}

However, if all authenticators drop the EAP session for a given EAP peer
and EAP server combination, a successful full handshake is not possible.
An option in such a scenario would be to cache validated certificate
chains even if the EAP-TLS exchange fails, but such caching is currently
not specified in
\[[RFC7924](#RFC7924){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4.2.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.2.3 .section}
#### [4.2.3.](#section-4.2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Compressing Certificates](#name-compressing-certificates){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-compressing-certificates}

The TLS Working Group has standardized an extension for TLS 1.3
\[[RFC8879](#RFC8879){.xref}\] that allows compression of certificates
and certificate chains during full handshakes. The client can indicate
support for compressed server certificates by including this extension
in the ClientHello message. Similarly, the server can indicate support
for compression of client certificates by including this extension in
the CertificateRequest message. While such an extension can alleviate
the problem of excessive fragmentation in EAP-TLS, it can only be used
with TLS version 1.3 and higher. Deployments that rely on older versions
of TLS cannot benefit from this
extension.[¶](#section-4.2.3-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.2.4 .section}
#### [4.2.4.](#section-4.2.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Compact TLS 1.3](#name-compact-tls-13){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-compact-tls-13}

\[[cTLS](#I-D.ietf-tls-ctls){.xref}\] defines a \"compact\" version of
TLS 1.3 and reduces the message size of the protocol by removing
obsolete material and using more efficient encoding. It also defines a
compression profile with which either side can define a dictionary of
\"known certificates\". Thus, cTLS could provide another mechanism for
EAP-TLS deployments to reduce the size of messages and avoid excessive
fragmentation.[¶](#section-4.2.4-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.2.5 .section}
#### [4.2.5.](#section-4.2.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Suppressing Intermediate Certificates](#name-suppressing-intermediate-ce){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-suppressing-intermediate-ce}

For a client that has all intermediate certificates in the certificate
chain, having the server send intermediates in the TLS handshake
increases the size of the handshake unnecessarily.
\[[TLS-SIC](#I-D.thomson-tls-sic){.xref}\] proposes an extension for TLS
1.3 that allows a TLS client that has access to the complete set of
published intermediate certificates to inform servers of this fact so
that the server can avoid sending intermediates, reducing the size of
the TLS handshake. The mechanism is intended to be complementary with
certificate compression.[¶](#section-4.2.5-1){.pilcrow}

The Authority Information Access (AIA) extension specified in
\[[RFC5280](#RFC5280){.xref}\] can be used with end-entity and CA
certificates to access information about the issuer of the certificate
in which the extension appears. For example, it can be used to provide
the address of the Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) responder
from where revocation status of the certificate (in which the extension
appears) can be checked. It can also be used to obtain the issuer
certificate. Thus, the AIA extension can reduce the size of the
certificate chain by only including a pointer to the issuer certificate
instead of including the entire issuer certificate. However, it requires
the side receiving the certificate containing the extension to have
network connectivity (unless the information is already cached locally).
Naturally, such indirection cannot be used for the server certificate
(since EAP peers in most deployments do not have network connectivity
before authentication and typically do not maintain an up-to-date local
cache of issuer certificates).[¶](#section-4.2.5-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-4.2.6 .section}
#### [4.2.6.](#section-4.2.6){.section-number .selfRef} [Raw Public Keys](#name-raw-public-keys){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-raw-public-keys}

\[[RFC7250](#RFC7250){.xref}\] defines a new certificate type and TLS
extensions to enable the use of raw public keys for authentication. Raw
public keys use only a subset of information found in typical
certificates and are therefore much smaller in size. However, raw public
keys require an out-of-band mechanism to bind the public key with the
entity presenting the key. Using raw public keys will obviously avoid
the fragmentation problems resulting from large certificates and long
certificate chains. Deployments can consider their use as long as an
appropriate out-of-band mechanism for binding public keys with
identifiers is in place. Naturally, deployments will also need to
consider the challenges of revocation and key rotation with the use of
raw public keys.[¶](#section-4.2.6-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#new-cert-format}
::: {#section-4.2.7 .section}
#### [4.2.7.](#section-4.2.7){.section-number .selfRef} [New Certificate Types and Compression Algorithms](#name-new-certificate-types-and-c){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-new-certificate-types-and-c}

There is ongoing work to specify new certificate types that are smaller
than traditional X.509 certificates. For example,
\[[CBOR-CERT](#I-D.mattsson-cose-cbor-cert-compress){.xref}\] defines a
Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR)
\[[RFC8949](#RFC8949){.xref}\] encoding of X.509 Certificates. The CBOR
encoding can be used to compress existing X.509 certificates or for
natively signed CBOR certificates.
\[[TLS-CWT](#I-D.tschofenig-tls-cwt){.xref}\] registers a new TLS
Certificate type that would enable TLS implementations to use CBOR Web
Tokens (CWTs) \[[RFC8392](#RFC8392){.xref}\] as certificates. While
these are early initiatives, future EAP-TLS deployments can consider the
use of these new certificate types and compression algorithms to avoid
large message sizes.[¶](#section-4.2.7-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#update-APs}
::: {#section-4.3 .section}
### [4.3.](#section-4.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Updating Authenticators](#name-updating-authenticators){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-updating-authenticators}

There are several legitimate reasons that authenticators may want to
limit the number of packets / octets / round trips that can be sent. The
main reason has been to work around issues where the EAP peer and EAP
server end up in an infinite loop ACKing their messages. Another reason
is that unlimited communication from an unauthenticated device using EAP
could provide a channel for inappropriate bulk data transfer. A third
reason is to prevent denial-of-service
attacks.[¶](#section-4.3-1){.pilcrow}

Updating the millions of already deployed access points and switches is
in many cases not realistic. Vendors may be out of business or no longer
supporting the products and administrators may have lost the login
information to the devices. For practical purposes, the EAP
infrastructure is ossified for the time
being.[¶](#section-4.3-2){.pilcrow}

Vendors making new authenticators should consider increasing the number
of round trips allowed to 100 before denying the EAP authentication to
complete. Based on the size of the certificates and certificate chains
currently deployed, such an increase would likely ensure that peers and
servers can complete EAP-TLS authentication. At the same time,
administrators responsible for EAP deployments should ensure that this
100 round-trip limit is not exceeded in
practice.[¶](#section-4.3-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

Updating implementations to TLS version 1.3 allows omitting all
certificates with a trust anchor known by the other endpoint. TLS 1.3
additionally provides improved security, privacy, and reduced latency
for EAP-TLS \[[RFC9190](#RFC9190){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

Security considerations when compressing certificates are specified in
\[[RFC8879](#RFC8879){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

Specific security considerations of the referenced documents apply when
they are taken into use.[¶](#section-6-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC3748\]
:   [Aboba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [Blunk, L.]{.refAuthor},
    [Vollbrecht, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Carlson, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [H.
    Levkowetz, Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Extensible Authentication Protocol
    (EAP)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 3748]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3748]{.seriesInfo}, June 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3748>\>.
:   

\[RFC4851\]
:   [Cam-Winget, N.]{.refAuthor}, [McGrew, D.]{.refAuthor},
    [Salowey, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [H. Zhou]{.refAuthor}, [\"The
    Flexible Authentication via Secure Tunneling Extensible
    Authentication Protocol Method (EAP-FAST)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4851]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4851]{.seriesInfo}, May 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4851>\>.
:   

\[RFC5216\]
:   [Simon, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Aboba, B.]{.refAuthor}, and [R.
    Hurst]{.refAuthor}, [\"The EAP-TLS Authentication
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5216]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5216]{.seriesInfo}, March 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5216>\>.
:   

\[RFC5280\]
:   [Cooper, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Santesson, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Farrell, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Boeyen, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Housley, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [W. Polk]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet
    X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate
    Revocation List (CRL) Profile\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    5280]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5280]{.seriesInfo}, May 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5280>\>.
:   

\[RFC5281\]
:   [Funk, P.]{.refAuthor} and [S. Blake-Wilson]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Extensible Authentication Protocol Tunneled Transport Layer
    Security Authenticated Protocol Version 0
    (EAP-TTLSv0)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5281]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5281]{.seriesInfo}, August 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5281>\>.
:   

\[RFC7170\]
:   [Zhou, H.]{.refAuthor}, [Cam-Winget, N.]{.refAuthor},
    [Salowey, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [S. Hanna]{.refAuthor}, [\"Tunnel
    Extensible Authentication Protocol (TEAP) Version 1\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 7170]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC7170]{.seriesInfo}, May
    2014, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7170>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8446\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Transport Layer Security (TLS)
    Protocol Version 1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8446]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8446]{.seriesInfo}, August 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8446>\>.
:   

\[RFC9190\]
:   [Preuß Mattsson, J.]{.refAuthor} and [M. Sethi]{.refAuthor},
    [\"EAP-TLS 1.3: Using the Extensible Authentication Protocol with
    TLS 1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 9190]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC9190]{.seriesInfo}, February 2022,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9190>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-7.2 .section}
### [7.2.](#section-7.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[CBOR-CERT\]
:   [Raza, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Höglund, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Selander, G.]{.refAuthor}, [Preuß Mattsson, J.]{.refAuthor}, and
    [M. Furuhed]{.refAuthor}, [\"CBOR Encoded X.509 Certificates (C509
    Certificates)\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-mattsson-cose-cbor-cert-compress-08]{.seriesInfo}, 22 February
    2021,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-mattsson-cose-cbor-cert-compress-08>\>.
:   

\[cTLS\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}, [Barnes, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [H.
    Tschofenig]{.refAuthor}, [\"Compact TLS 1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-tls-ctls-04]{.seriesInfo}, 25 October 2021,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-tls-ctls-04>\>.
:   

\[IEEE-802.1X\]
:   [IEEE]{.refAuthor}, [\"IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area
    NNetworks\--Port-Based Network Access Control\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1109/IEEESTD.2020.9018454]{.seriesInfo}, [IEEE Standard
    802.1X-2020]{.seriesInfo}, February 2020,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2020.9018454>\>.
:   

\[PEAP\]
:   [Microsoft Corporation]{.refAuthor}, [\"\[MS-PEAP\]: Protected
    Extensible Authentication Protocol (PEAP)\"]{.refTitle}, June 2021.
:   

\[RFC2865\]
:   [Rigney, C.]{.refAuthor}, [Willens, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Rubens, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [W. Simpson]{.refAuthor}, [\"Remote
    Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    2865]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2865]{.seriesInfo}, June 2000,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2865>\>.
:   

\[RFC5246\]
:   [Dierks, T.]{.refAuthor} and [E. Rescorla]{.refAuthor}, [\"The
    Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 5246]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5246]{.seriesInfo}, August
    2008, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5246>\>.
:   

\[RFC6066\]
:   [Eastlake 3rd, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Transport Layer Security (TLS)
    Extensions: Extension Definitions\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    6066]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC6066]{.seriesInfo}, January
    2011, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6066>\>.
:   

\[RFC6090\]
:   [McGrew, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Igoe, K.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Salter]{.refAuthor}, [\"Fundamental Elliptic Curve Cryptography
    Algorithms\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6090]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6090]{.seriesInfo}, February 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6090>\>.
:   

\[RFC7250\]
:   [Wouters, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Tschofenig, H., Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [Gilmore, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Weiler, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [T.
    Kivinen]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using Raw Public Keys in Transport Layer
    Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security
    (DTLS)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7250]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7250]{.seriesInfo}, June 2014,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7250>\>.
:   

\[RFC7924\]
:   [Santesson, S.]{.refAuthor} and [H. Tschofenig]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Transport Layer Security (TLS) Cached Information
    Extension\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7924]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7924]{.seriesInfo}, July 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7924>\>.
:   

\[RFC8032\]
:   [Josefsson, S.]{.refAuthor} and [I. Liusvaara]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Edwards-Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 8032]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8032]{.seriesInfo},
    January 2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8032>\>.
:   

\[RFC8392\]
:   [Jones, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Wahlstroem, E.]{.refAuthor},
    [Erdtman, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [H. Tschofenig]{.refAuthor}, [\"CBOR
    Web Token (CWT)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8392]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8392]{.seriesInfo}, May 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8392>\>.
:   

\[RFC8422\]
:   [Nir, Y.]{.refAuthor}, [Josefsson, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [M.
    Pegourie-Gonnard]{.refAuthor}, [\"Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC)
    Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Versions 1.2 and
    Earlier\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8422]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8422]{.seriesInfo}, August 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8422>\>.
:   

\[RFC8879\]
:   [Ghedini, A.]{.refAuthor} and [V. Vasiliev]{.refAuthor}, [\"TLS
    Certificate Compression\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8879]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8879]{.seriesInfo}, December 2020,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8879>\>.
:   

\[RFC8949\]
:   [Bormann, C.]{.refAuthor} and [P. Hoffman]{.refAuthor}, [\"Concise
    Binary Object Representation (CBOR)\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    94]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8949]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8949]{.seriesInfo}, December 2020,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8949>\>.
:   

\[TLS-CWT\]
:   [Tschofenig, H.]{.refAuthor} and [M. Brossard]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using
    CBOR Web Tokens (CWTs) in Transport Layer Security (TLS) and
    Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS)\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in
    Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-tschofenig-tls-cwt-02]{.seriesInfo}, 13 July 2020,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-tschofenig-tls-cwt-02>\>.
:   

\[TLS-EAP-TYPES\]
:   [DeKok, A.]{.refAuthor}, [\"TLS-based EAP types and TLS
    1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent}, [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ietf-emu-tls-eap-types-04]{.seriesInfo}, 22 January 2022,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-emu-tls-eap-types-04>\>.
:   

\[TLS-SIC\]
:   [Thomson, M.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Suppressing Intermediate Certificates
    in TLS\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-thomson-tls-sic-00]{.seriesInfo}, 27 March
    2019,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-thomson-tls-sic-00>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

This document is a result of several useful discussions with [Alan
DeKok]{.contact-name}, [Bernard Aboba]{.contact-name}, [Jari
Arkko]{.contact-name}, [Jouni Malinen]{.contact-name}, [Darshak
Thakore]{.contact-name}, and [Hannes
Tschofening]{.contact-name}.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Mohit Sethi]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
FI-[02420]{.postal-code} [Jorvas]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Finland]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <mohit@iki.fi>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[John Preuß Mattsson]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ericsson]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Kista]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Sweden]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <john.mattsson@ericsson.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Sean Turner]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[sn3rd]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <sean@sn3rd.com>
:::
:::
:::
