  RFC 9236       Arch Considerations of ICN Using NRS   April 2022
  -------------- -------------------------------------- ------------
  Hong, et al.   Informational                          \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)

RFC:
:   [9236](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9236){.eref}

Category:
:   Informational

Published:
:   April 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    J. Hong
    :::

    ::: org
    ETRI
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    T. You
    :::

    ::: org
    ETRI
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    V. Kafle
    :::

    ::: org
    NICT
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9236 {#rfcnum}

# Architectural Considerations of Information-Centric Networking (ICN) Using a Name Resolution Service {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document describes architectural considerations and implications
related to the use of a Name Resolution Service (NRS) in
Information-Centric Networking (ICN). It explains how the ICN
architecture can change when an NRS is utilized and how its use
influences the ICN routing system. This document is a product of the
Information-Centric Networking Research Group
(ICNRG).[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for informational
purposes.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
The IRTF publishes the results of Internet-related research and
development activities. These results might not be suitable for
deployment. This RFC represents the consensus of the Information-Centric
Networking Research Group of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
Documents approved for publication by the IRSG are not candidates for
any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9236>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Background](#name-background){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Implications of an NRS in
    ICN](#name-implications-of-an-nrs-in-i){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [ICN Architectural Considerations for
    NRS](#name-icn-architectural-considera){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.1}
        [5.1](#section-5.1){.xref}.  [Name Mapping Records Registration,
        Resolution, and
        Update](#name-name-mapping-records-regist){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.2}
        [5.2](#section-5.2){.xref}.  [Protocols and
        Semantics](#name-protocols-and-semantics){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5.2.3}
        [5.3](#section-5.3){.xref}.  [Routing
        System](#name-routing-system){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Conclusion](#name-conclusion){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.1}
        [9.1](#section-9.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9.2.2}
        [9.2](#section-9.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#appendix-A){.xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

Information-Centric Networking (ICN) is an approach to evolving the
Internet infrastructure to provide direct access to Named Data Objects
(NDOs) by names. In two common ICN architectures, Named Data Networking
(NDN) \[[NDN](#NDN){.xref}\] and Content-Centric Networking (CCNx)
\[[CCNx](#CCNx){.xref}\], the name of an NDO is used directly to route a
request to retrieve the data object. Such direct name-based routing has
inherent challenges in enabling a globally scalable routing system,
accommodating producer mobility, and supporting off-path caching. These
specific issues are discussed in detail in [Section
3](#background){.xref}. In order to address these challenges, a Name
Resolution Service (NRS) has been utilized in the literature as well as
the proposals of several ICN projects \[[Afanasyev](#Afanasyev){.xref}\]
\[[Zhang2](#Zhang2){.xref}\]
\[[Ravindran](#I-D.ravi-icnrg-ccn-forwarding-label){.xref}\]
\[[SAIL](#SAIL){.xref}\] \[[MF](#MF){.xref}\]
\[[Bayhan](#Bayhan){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

This document describes the potential changes in the ICN architecture
caused by the introduction of an NRS and the corresponding implication
to the ICN routing system. It also describes ICN architectural
considerations for the integration of an NRS. The scope of this document
includes considerations from the perspective of an ICN architecture and
routing system when using an NRS in ICN. A description of the NRS itself
is provided in the companion NRS design considerations document
\[[RFC9138](#RFC9138){.xref}\], which provides the NRS approaches,
functions, and design considerations.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

This document represents the consensus of the Information-Centric
Networking Research Group (ICNRG). It has been reviewed extensively by
the Research Group (RG) members who are actively involved in the
research and development of the technology covered by this document. It
is not an IETF product and is not a standard.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

[]{.break}

Name Resolution Service (NRS):
:   An NRS in ICN is defined as a service that provides the function of
    translating a content name or a data object name into some other
    information such as a routable prefix, a locator, an off-path-cache
    pointer, or an alias name that is more amenable than the input name
    to forwarding the object request toward the target destination
    storing the NDO \[[RFC9138](#RFC9138){.xref}\]. An NRS is most
    likely implemented through the use of a distributed mapping database
    system. The Domain Name System (DNS) may be used as an NRS. However,
    in this case, the requirements of frequent updates of NRS records
    due to the creations of a lot of new NDOs and changes in their
    locations in the network need to be
    considered.[¶](#section-2-1.2){.pilcrow}
:   

NRS server:
:   An NRS comprises the distributed NRS servers storing the mapping
    records in their databases. NRS servers store and maintain the
    mapping records that keep the mappings of content or object name to
    some other information that is used for forwarding the content
    request or the content itself.[¶](#section-2-1.4){.pilcrow}
:   

NRS resolver:
:   The client-side function of an NRS is called an NRS resolver. The
    NRS resolver is responsible for initiating name resolution request
    queries that ultimately lead to a name resolution of the target data
    objects. NRS resolvers can be located in the consumer (or client)
    nodes and/or ICN routers. An NRS resolver may also cache the mapping
    records obtained through the name resolution for later
    usage.[¶](#section-2-1.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Name registration:
:   In order to populate the NRS, the content names and their mapping
    records must be registered in the NRS system by a publisher who has
    access rights to at least one authoritative NRS server or by a
    producer who generates named data objects. The records contain the
    mapping of an object name to some information such as other alias
    names, routable prefixes, and locators, which are used for
    forwarding the content request. Thus, a publisher or producer of
    content creates an NRS registration request and sends it to an NRS
    server. On registration, the NRS server stores (or updates) the name
    mapping record in the database and sends an acknowledgement back to
    the producer or publisher that made the registration
    request.[¶](#section-2-1.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Name resolution:
:   Name resolution is the main function of the NRS system. It is
    performed by an NRS resolver, which can be deployed on a consumer
    node or an ICN router. Resolvers are responsible for either
    returning a cached mapping record (whose lifetime has not expired)
    or alternatively sending a name resolution request toward an NRS
    server. The NRS server searches for the content name in its mapping
    record database and, if found, retrieves the mapping record and
    returns it in a name resolution response message to the NRS
    resolver.[¶](#section-2-1.10){.pilcrow}
:   

NRS node:
:   NRS servers are also referred to as NRS nodes that maintain the name
    records. The terms are used
    interchangeably.[¶](#section-2-1.12){.pilcrow}
:   

NRS client:
:   A node that uses the NRS is called an NRS client. Any node that
    initiates a name registration, resolution, or update procedure is an
    NRS client; that is, NRS resolvers, ICN client nodes, ICN routers,
    or producers can be NRS clients.[¶](#section-2-1.14){.pilcrow}
:   
:::

::: {#background}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Background](#name-background){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-background}

A pure name-based routing approach in ICN has inherent challenges in
enabling a globally scalable routing system, accommodating producer
mobility, and supporting off-path caching. In order to address these
challenges, an NRS has been utilized in proposals and literature of
several ICN projects as follows:[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Routing scalability:
:   In ICN, application names identifying content are intended to be
    used directly for packet delivery, so ICN routers run a name-based
    routing protocol to build name-based routing and forwarding tables.
    Similar to the scalability challenge of IP routing, if
    non-aggregatable name prefixes are injected into the Default Route
    Free Zone (DFZ) of ICN routers, they would be driving the
    uncontrolled growth of the DFZ routing table size. Thus, providing
    the level of indirection enabled by an NRS in ICN can be an approach
    to keeping the routing table size under control. The NRS system
    resolves name prefixes that do not exist in the DFZ forwarding table
    into globally routable prefixes such as the one proposed in NDN
    \[[Afanasyev](#Afanasyev){.xref}\]. Another approach dealing with
    routing scalability is the Multi-level Distributed Hash Table (MDHT)
    used in NetInf \[[Dannewitz](#Dannewitz){.xref}\]. It provides
    name-based anycast routing that can support a non-hierarchical
    namespace and can be adopted on a global scale
    \[[Dannewitz2](#Dannewitz2){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Producer mobility:
:   In ICN, if a producer moves into a different name domain that uses a
    different name prefix, the request for a content produced by the
    moving producer with the origin content name must be forwarded to
    the moving producer\'s new location. Especially in a hierarchical
    naming scheme, producer mobility support is much harder than in a
    flat naming scheme since the routing tables in a broader area need
    to be updated to track the producer movement. Therefore, various ICN
    architectures such as NetInf \[[Dannewitz](#Dannewitz){.xref}\] and
    MobilityFirst \[[MF](#MF){.xref}\] have adopted NRS systems to
    tackle the issues of producers whose location
    changes.[¶](#section-3-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Off-path caching:
:   In-network caching is a common feature of an ICN architecture.
    Caching approaches can be categorized into on-path caching and
    off-path caching, according to the location of caches in relation to
    the forwarding path from the original content store to a consumer.
    Off-path caching, sometimes also referred to as content replication
    or content storing, aims to replicate a Named Data Object in various
    locations within a network in order to increase the availability of
    content, reduce access latency, or both. These caching locations may
    not be lying along the content forwarding path. Thus, finding
    off-path cached content requires more complex forwarding procedures
    if a pure name-based routing is employed. In order to support access
    to off-path caches, the locations of replicas are usually advertised
    into a name-based routing system or into an NRS as described in
    \[[Bayhan](#Bayhan){.xref}\].[¶](#section-3-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

This document discusses architectural considerations and implications of
ICN when an NRS is utilized to solve such challenges facing a name-based
routing in ICN.[¶](#section-3-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Implications of an NRS in ICN](#name-implications-of-an-nrs-in-i){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-implications-of-an-nrs-in-i}

An NRS is not a mandatory part of an ICN architecture, as the majority
of ICN architectures uses name-based routing that avoids the need for a
name resolution procedure. Therefore, the utilization of an NRS in an
ICN architecture changes some architectural aspects at least with
respect to forwarding procedures, latency, and security, as discussed
below:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Forwarding procedure:
:   When an NRS is included in an ICN architecture, the name resolution
    procedure has to be included in the ICN overall routing and
    forwarding architectural procedures. To integrate an NRS into an ICN
    architecture, there are certain things that have to be decided and
    specified such as where, when, and how the name resolution task is
    performed.[¶](#section-4-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Latency:
:   When an NRS is included in an ICN architecture, additional latency
    introduced by the name resolution process is incurred by the routing
    and forwarding system. Although the latency due to the name
    resolution is added, the total latency of individual requests being
    served could be lower if the nearest copies or off-path caches can
    be located by the NRS lookup procedure. Additionally, there might be
    a favorable trade-off between the name resolution latency and
    inter-domain traffic reduction by finding the nearest off-path
    cached copy of the content. Finding the nearest cache holding the
    content might significantly reduce the content discovery as well as
    delivery latency.[¶](#section-4-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Security:
:   When any new component such as an NRS is introduced in the ICN
    architecture, the attack surface may increase. Protection of the NRS
    system itself against attacks such as Distributed Denial of Service
    (DDoS) and spoofing or alteration of name mapping records and
    related signaling messages may be
    challenging.[¶](#section-4-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   
:::

::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [ICN Architectural Considerations for NRS](#name-icn-architectural-considera){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-icn-architectural-considera}

This section discusses the various items that can be considered from the
perspective of ICN architecture when employing an NRS system. These
items are related to the registration, resolution, and update of name
mapping records, protocols and messages, and integration with the
routing system.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5.1 .section}
### [5.1.](#section-5.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Name Mapping Records Registration, Resolution, and Update](#name-name-mapping-records-regist){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-name-mapping-records-regist}

When an NRS is integrated in ICN architecture, the functions related to
the registration, resolution, and update of name mapping records have to
be considered. The NRS nodes maintain the name mapping records and may
exist as an overlay network over the ICN routers, that is, they
communicate to each other through ICN routers. [Figure
1](#rl-fig1){.xref} shows the NRS nodes and NRS clients connected
through an underlying network. The NRS nodes should be deployed in such
a manner that an NRS node is always available at a short distance from
an NRS client so that communication latency for the name registration
and resolution requested by the NRS client remains very low. The name
registration, name resolution, and name record update procedures are
briefly discussed below.[¶](#section-5.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-nrs-nodes-and-nrs-clients-c}

::: {#rl-fig1}
::: {#section-5.1-2.1 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
                   +------------+             +------------+
                   |  NRS Node  |             |  NRS Node  |
                   +------------+             +------------+
                         |                          |
                         |                          |
      +------------+     |                          |     +------------+
      | NRS Client |--------------------------------------| NRS Client |
      +------------+         underlying network           +------------+
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [NRS Nodes and NRS Clients Connected
through an Underlying
Network](#name-nrs-nodes-and-nrs-clients-c){.selfRef}
:::

[]{.break}

Name registration:
:   Name registration is performed by the producer (as an NRS client)
    when it creates a new content. When a producer creates content and
    assigns a name from its name prefix space to the content, the
    producer performs the name registration in an NRS node. Name
    registration may be performed by an ICN router when the ICN
    architecture supports off-path caching or cooperative caching since
    involving an NRS may be a good idea for off-path caching. The ICN
    routers with forwarder caches do not require name registration for
    their cached content because they lie on the path toward an upstream
    content store or producer. They will be hit when a future request is
    forwarded to the content producer by an ICN router lying downstream
    toward the ICN client node. However, ICN routers performing off-path
    caching of content must invoke the name registration procedure so
    that other ICN routers can depend on name resolutions to know about
    the off-path cache locations. If a content gets cached in many
    off-path ICN routers, all of them may register the same content
    names in the same NRS node, resulting in multiple registration
    actions. In this case, the NRS node adds the new location of the
    content to the name record together with the previous locations. In
    this way, each of the name records stored in the NRS node may
    contain multiple locations of the content. Assigning validity time
    or a lifetime of each mapping record may be considered especially
    for the off-path caching content and managing
    mobility.[¶](#section-5.1-4.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Name resolution:
:   Name resolution is performed by an NRS client to obtain the name
    record from an NRS node by sending a name resolution request message
    and getting a response containing the record. In the name-based ICN
    routing context, the name resolution is needed by any ICN router
    whose forwarding information base (FIB) does not contain the
    requested name prefix. Name resolution may also be performed by the
    consumer (especially in the case where the consumer is multihomed)
    to forward the content request in a better direction so that it
    obtains the content from the nearest cache. If the consumer is
    single homed, it may not bother to perform name resolution, instead
    depending on either straightforward name-based routing or name
    resolution by an upstream ICN router. In this case, the consumer
    creates the content request packet containing the content name and
    forwards to the nearest ICN router. The ICN router checks its FIB
    table to see where to forward the content request. If the ICN router
    fails to identify whether the requested content is reachable, it
    performs name resolution to obtain the name mapping record and adds
    this information to its FIB. The ICN router may also perform name
    resolution even before the arrival of a content request to use the
    name mapping record to configure its
    FIB.[¶](#section-5.1-4.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Name record update:
:   Name record update is carried out when a content name mapping record
    changes, e.g., the content is not available in one or more of the
    previous locations. The name record update includes the substitution
    and deletion of the name mapping records. The name record update may
    take place explicitly by the exchange of name record update messages
    or implicitly when a timeout occurs and a name record is deemed to
    be invalid. The implicit update is possible when each record is
    accompanied by a lifetime value. The lifetime can be renewed only by
    the authoritative producer or node. The cached mapping records get
    erased after the lifetime expires unless a lifetime extension
    indication is obtained from the authoritative
    producer.[¶](#section-5.1-4.6){.pilcrow}
:   
:::

::: {#section-5.2 .section}
### [5.2.](#section-5.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Protocols and Semantics](#name-protocols-and-semantics){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-protocols-and-semantics}

In order to develop an NRS system within a local ICN network domain or
global ICN network domain, new protocols and semantics must be designed
and implemented to manage and resolve names among different
namespaces.[¶](#section-5.2-1){.pilcrow}

One way of implementing an NRS for CCNx is by extending the basic TLV
format and semantics \[[RFC8569](#RFC8569){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8609](#RFC8609){.xref}\]. For instance, name resolution and
response messages can be implemented by defining new type fields in the
Interest and Content Object messages
\[[CCNxNRS](#I-D.hong-icnrg-ccnx-nrs){.xref}\]. By leveraging the
existing CCNx Interest and Content Object packets for name resolution
and registration, the NRS system can be deployed with a few ICN protocol
changes. However, because of confining the changes to the basic ICN
protocol and semantics, the NRS system may not be able to exploit more
flexible and scalable designs.[¶](#section-5.2-2){.pilcrow}

On the other hand, an NRS system can be designed independently with its
own protocol and semantics like the NRS system described in
\[[Hong](#Hong){.xref}\]. For instance, the NRS protocol and messages
can be implemented by using a RESTful API, and the NRS can be operated
as an application protocol independent of the rest of the ICN
protocol.[¶](#section-5.2-3){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-5.3 .section}
### [5.3.](#section-5.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Routing System](#name-routing-system){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-routing-system}

An NRS reduces the routing complexity of ICN architecture compared to
pure name-based routing. It does so by permitting the routing system to
update the routing table on demand with the help of name records
obtained from NRS. The routing system therefore needs to make name
resolution requests and process the information returned, such as a
prefix, a locator, an off-path-cache pointer, or an alias name, obtained
from the name resolution.[¶](#section-5.3-1){.pilcrow}

No matter what kind of information is obtained from the name resolution,
as long as it is in the form of a name, the content request message in
the routing system may be reformatted with the obtained information. In
this case, the content name requested originally by a consumer needs to
be involved in the reformatted content request to check the integrity of
the binding between the name and the requested content. In other words,
the information obtained from the name resolution is used to forward the
content request, and the original content name requested by a consumer
is used to identify the content. Alternatively, the resolved information
may be used to build the routing table.[¶](#section-5.3-2){.pilcrow}

The information obtained from name resolution may not be in the form of
a name. For example, it may identify tunnel endpoints by IP address and
instead be used to construct an IP protocol tunnel through which to
forward the content request.[¶](#section-5.3-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Conclusion](#name-conclusion){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-conclusion}

A Name Resolution Service (NRS) is not a mandatory part in an ICN
architecture, as the majority of ICN architectures use name-based
routing that does not employ a name resolution procedure. However, such
name-based routing in ICN has inherent challenges in enabling a globally
scalable routing system, accommodating producer mobility, and supporting
off-path caching. In order to address these challenges, an NRS system
has been introduced in several ICN projects. Therefore, this document
describes how the ICN architecture changes when an NRS is utilized and
how this affects the ICN routing system.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

The document defines a few terminologies related to an NRS and explains
some inherent challenges of pure name-based routing in ICN such as
routing scalability, producer mobility, and off-path caching. This
document describes how the ICN architecture would change with respect to
procedures, latency, and security when an NRS is utilized. According to
the ICN architectural changes, this document describes ICN architectural
considerations for NRS such as the functions related to the
registration, resolution and update of name mapping records, protocols
and semantics to implement an NRS system, and the routing system
involving the name resolution.[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

When any new component such as an NRS is introduced in the ICN
architecture, the attack surface increases. The related security
vulnerability issues are discussed below:[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Namespace security:
:   In order to deploy an NRS system in ICN architecture, ICN
    namespaces, which may be assigned by authoritative entities, must be
    securely mapped to the content publishers and securely managed by
    them. According to the ICN research challenges
    \[[RFC7927](#RFC7927){.xref}\], a new namespace can also provide an
    integrity verification function to authenticate its publisher. The
    issues of namespace authentication and the mapping among different
    namespaces require further
    investigation.[¶](#section-8-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

NRS system security:
:   An NRS requires the deployment of new entities (e.g., NRS servers)
    to build distributed and scalable NRS systems. Thus, the entities,
    e.g., an NRS server maintaining a mapping database, could be the
    focus of attacks by receiving malicious requests from innumerable
    adversaries comprising of Denial-of-Service or
    Distributed-Denial-of-Service attacks. In addition, NRS clients in
    general must trust the NRS nodes in other network domains to some
    degree, and communication among them must also be protected securely
    to prevent malicious entities from participating in this
    communication. The history of name resolution data requires to be
    stored and analyzed as in passive DNS to uncover potential security
    incidents or discover malicious
    infrastructures.[¶](#section-8-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

NRS protocol and message security:
:   In an NRS system, the protocols to generate, transmit, and receive
    NRS messages related to the name registration, resolution, and
    record update should be protected by proper security mechanisms.
    Proper security measures must be provided so that only legitimate
    nodes can initiate and read NRS messages. These messages must be
    secured by integrity protection and authentication mechanisms so
    that unauthorized parties cannot manipulate them when being
    forwarded through the network. Security measures to encrypt these
    messages should also be developed to thwart all threats to both
    security and privacy. Numerous problems similar to the security
    issues of an IP network and DNS can affect the overall ICN
    architecture. The DNS QNAME minimization type of approach would be
    suitable for preserving privacy in the name resolution process.
    Therefore, security mechanisms such as accessibility,
    authentication, etc., for the NRS system
    \[[RFC9138](#RFC9138){.xref}\] should be considered to protect not
    only the NRS system but also the ICN architecture
    overall.[¶](#section-8-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   
:::

::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-9.1 .section}
### [9.1.](#section-9.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC7927\]
:   [Kutscher, D., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Eum, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Pentikousis, K.]{.refAuthor}, [Psaras, I.]{.refAuthor},
    [Corujo, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Saucez, D.]{.refAuthor},
    [Schmidt, T.]{.refAuthor}, and [M. Waehlisch]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Information-Centric Networking (ICN) Research
    Challenges\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7927]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7927]{.seriesInfo}, July 2016,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7927>\>.
:   

\[RFC8569\]
:   [Mosko, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Solis, I.]{.refAuthor}, and [C.
    Wood]{.refAuthor}, [\"Content-Centric Networking (CCNx)
    Semantics\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8569]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8569]{.seriesInfo}, July 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8569>\>.
:   

\[RFC8609\]
:   [Mosko, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Solis, I.]{.refAuthor}, and [C.
    Wood]{.refAuthor}, [\"Content-Centric Networking (CCNx) Messages in
    TLV Format\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8609]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8609]{.seriesInfo}, July 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8609>\>.
:   

\[RFC9138\]
:   [Hong, J.]{.refAuthor}, [You, T.]{.refAuthor},
    [Dong, L.]{.refAuthor}, [Westphal, C.]{.refAuthor}, and [B.
    Ohlman]{.refAuthor}, [\"Design Considerations for Name Resolution
    Service in Information-Centric Networking (ICN)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    9138]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC9138]{.seriesInfo}, December
    2021, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9138>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-9.2 .section}
### [9.2.](#section-9.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[Afanasyev\]
:   [Afanasyev, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Yi, C.]{.refAuthor},
    [Wang, L.]{.refAuthor}, [Zhang, B.]{.refAuthor}, and [L.
    Zhang]{.refAuthor}, [\"SNAMP: Secure namespace mapping to scale NDN
    forwarding\"]{.refTitle}, [2015 IEEE Conference on Computer
    Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS)]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1109/INFCOMW.2015.7179398]{.seriesInfo}, April 2015,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/INFCOMW.2015.7179398>\>.
:   

\[Bayhan\]
:   [Bayhan, S.]{.refAuthor}, [Ott, J.]{.refAuthor},
    [Kangasharju, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Sathiaseelan, A.]{.refAuthor}, and
    [J. Crowcroft]{.refAuthor}, [\"On Content Indexing for Off-Path
    Caching in Information-Centric Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [ACM
    ICN]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1145/2984356.2984372]{.seriesInfo},
    September 2016, \<<https://doi.org/10.1145/2984356.2984372>\>.
:   

\[CCNx\]
:   [\"Cicn\"]{.refTitle}, \<<https://wiki.fd.io/view/Cicn>\>.
:   

\[CCNxNRS\]
:   [Hong, J.]{.refAuthor}, [You, T.]{.refAuthor}, and [Y.
    Hong]{.refAuthor}, [\"CCNx Extension for Name Resolution
    Service\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-hong-icnrg-ccnx-nrs-02]{.seriesInfo}, 2 July
    2018,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-hong-icnrg-ccnx-nrs-02>\>.
:   

\[Dannewitz\]
:   [Dannewitz, C.]{.refAuthor}, [Kutscher, D.]{.refAuthor},
    [Ohlman, B.]{.refAuthor}, [Farrell, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Ahlgren, B.]{.refAuthor}, and [H. Karl]{.refAuthor}, [\"Network of
    Information (NetInf) - An information-centric networking
    architecture\"]{.refTitle}, [Computer Communications vol. 36, issue
    7]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1016/j.comcom.2013.01.009]{.seriesInfo},
    April 2013, \<<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2013.01.009>\>.
:   

\[Dannewitz2\]
:   [Dannewitz, C.]{.refAuthor}, [D\'Ambrosio, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [V.
    Vercellone]{.refAuthor}, [\"Hierarchical DHT-based name resolution
    for information-centric networks\"]{.refTitle}, [Computer
    Communications vol. 36, issue 7]{.refContent}, [DOI
    10.1016/j.comcom.2013.01.014]{.seriesInfo}, April 2013,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2013.01.014>\>.
:   

\[Hong\]
:   [Hong, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Chun, W.]{.refAuthor}, and [H.
    Jung]{.refAuthor}, [\"Demonstrating a Scalable Name Resolution
    System for Information-Centric Networking\"]{.refTitle}, [ACM
    ICN]{.refContent}, [DOI 10.1145/2810156.2812617]{.seriesInfo},
    September 2015, \<<https://doi.org/10.1145/2810156.2812617>\>.
:   

\[MF\]
:   [Future Internet Architecture (FIA)]{.refAuthor},
    [\"MobilityFirst\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<http://mobilityfirst.cs.umass.edu/>\>.
:   

\[NDN\]
:   [NDN]{.refAuthor}, [\"Named Data Networking\"]{.refTitle}, September
    2010, \<<https://www.named-data.net>\>.
:   

\[Ravindran\]
:   [Ravindran, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Chakraborti, A.]{.refAuthor}, and [A.
    Azgin]{.refAuthor}, [\"Forwarding Label support in CCN
    Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft,
    draft-ravi-icnrg-ccn-forwarding-label-02]{.seriesInfo}, 5 March
    2018,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ravi-icnrg-ccn-forwarding-label-02>\>.
:   

\[SAIL\]
:   [\"Scalable and Adaptive Internet Solutions (SAIL)\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.sail-project.eu/>\>.
:   

\[Zhang2\]
:   [Zhang, Y.]{.refAuthor}, [Afanasyev, A.]{.refAuthor},
    [Burke, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [L. Zhang]{.refAuthor}, [\"A Survey of
    Mobility Support in Named Data Networking\"]{.refTitle}, [Named Data
    Networking]{.refContent}, [Workshop on Name-Oriented Mobility:
    Architecture, Algorithms and Applications (NOM)]{.refContent},
    April 2016.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#Acknowledgements}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

The authors would like to thank [Dave Oran]{.contact-name} (ICNRG
Co-chair) for very useful reviews and comments, which helped to
immeasurably improve this document.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Jungha Hong]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[ETRI]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Yuseung-Gu]{.extended-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[218 Gajeong-ro]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Daejeon]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[34129]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Republic of Korea]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <jhong@etri.re.kr>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Tae-Wan You]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[ETRI]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Yuseung-Gu]{.extended-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[218 Gajeong-ro]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Daejeon]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[34129]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Republic of Korea]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <twyou@etri.re.kr>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Ved Kafle]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[NICT]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Koganei]{.extended-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[4-2-1 Nukui-Kitamachi]{.street-address}, [Tokyo]{.region}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[184-8795]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Japan]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <kafle@nict.go.jp>
:::
:::
:::
