  RFC 9268             Path MTU Option   August 2022
  -------------------- ----------------- -------------
  Hinden & Fairhurst   Experimental      \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9268](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9268){.eref}

Category:
:   Experimental

Published:
:   August 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    R. Hinden
    :::

    ::: org
    Check Point Software
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    G. Fairhurst
    :::

    ::: org
    University of Aberdeen
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9268 {#rfcnum}

# IPv6 Minimum Path MTU Hop-by-Hop Option {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document specifies a new IPv6 Hop-by-Hop Option that is used to
record the Minimum Path MTU (PMTU) along the forward path between a
source host to a destination host. The recorded value can then be
communicated back to the source using the return Path MTU field in the
Option.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for examination, experimental implementation, and
evaluation.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet
community. This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Not all documents approved
by the IESG are candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see
Section 2 of RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9268>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal
Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the Revised
BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1}
        [1.1](#section-1.1){.xref}.  [Example
        Operation](#name-example-operation){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.2}
        [1.2](#section-1.2){.xref}.  [Use of the IPv6 Hop-by-Hop Options
        Header](#name-use-of-the-ipv6-hop-by-hop-){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [Motivation and Problem
    Solved](#name-motivation-and-problem-solv){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Requirements
    Language](#name-requirements-language){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Applicability
    Statements](#name-applicability-statements){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [IPv6 Minimum Path MTU Hop-by-Hop
    Option](#name-ipv6-minimum-path-mtu-hop-b){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [Router, Host, and Transport Layer
    Behaviors](#name-router-host-and-transport-l){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.1}
        [6.1](#section-6.1){.xref}.  [Router
        Behavior](#name-router-behavior){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.2}
        [6.2](#section-6.2){.xref}.  [Host Operating System
        Behavior](#name-host-operating-system-behav){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.3}
        [6.3](#section-6.3){.xref}.  [Transport Layer
        Behavior](#name-transport-layer-behavior){.xref}

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.3.2.1}
            [6.3.1](#section-6.3.1){.xref}.  [Including the Option in an
            Outgoing Packet](#name-including-the-option-in-an-){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.3.2.2}
            [6.3.2](#section-6.3.2){.xref}.  [Validation of the Packet
            that Includes the
            Option](#name-validation-of-the-packet-th){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.3.2.3}
            [6.3.3](#section-6.3.3){.xref}.  [Receiving the
            Option](#name-receiving-the-option){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.3.2.4}
            [6.3.4](#section-6.3.4){.xref}.  [Using the Rtn-PMTU
            Field](#name-using-the-rtn-pmtu-field){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.3.2.5}
            [6.3.5](#section-6.3.5){.xref}.  [Detecting Path
            Changes](#name-detecting-path-changes){.xref}
            :::

        -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6.2.3.2.6}
            [6.3.6](#section-6.3.6){.xref}.  [Detection of Dropping
            Packets that Include the
            Option](#name-detection-of-dropping-packe){.xref}
            :::
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [8](#section-8){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.1}
        [8.1](#section-8.1){.xref}.  [Router Option
        Processing](#name-router-option-processing){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.2}
        [8.2](#section-8.2){.xref}.  [Network-Layer Host
        Processing](#name-network-layer-host-processi){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.3}
        [8.3](#section-8.3){.xref}.  [Validating Use of the Option
        Data](#name-validating-use-of-the-optio){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.4}
        [8.4](#section-8.4){.xref}.  [Direct Use of the Rtn-PMTU
        Value](#name-direct-use-of-the-rtn-pmtu-){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.5}
        [8.5](#section-8.5){.xref}.  [Using the Rtn-PMTU Value as a Hint
        for Probing](#name-using-the-rtn-pmtu-value-as){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8.2.6}
        [8.6](#section-8.6){.xref}.  [Impact of
        Middleboxes](#name-impact-of-middleboxes){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [9](#section-9){.xref}.  [Experiment
    Goals](#name-experiment-goals){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [10](#section-10){.xref}. [Implementation
    Status](#name-implementation-status){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [11](#section-11){.xref}. [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.1}
        [11.1](#section-11.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11.2.2}
        [11.2](#section-11.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.12}
    [Appendix A](#appendix-A){.xref}.  [Examples of
    Usage](#name-examples-of-usage){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.13}
    [](#appendix-B){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.14}
    [](#appendix-C){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#Intro}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

This document specifies a new IPv6 Hop-by-Hop (HBH) Option to record the
minimum Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) along the forward path between a
source and a destination host. The source host creates a packet with
this Option and initializes the Min-PMTU field with the value of the MTU
for the outbound link that will be used to forward the packet towards
the destination host.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

At each subsequent hop where the Option is processed, the router
compares the value of the Min-PMTU field in the Option and the MTU of
its outgoing link. If the MTU of the link is less than the Min-PMTU, it
rewrites the value in the Option Data with the smaller value. When the
packet arrives at the destination host, the host can send the value of
the minimum Reported MTU for the path back to the source host using the
Rtn-PMTU field in the Option. The source host can then use this value as
input to the method that sets the Path MTU (PMTU) used by upper-layer
protocols.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

The IPv6 Minimum Path MTU Hop-by-Hop (MinPMTU HBH) Option is designed to
work with packet sizes that can be specified in the IPv6 header. The
maximum packet size that can be specified in an IPv6 header is 65,535
octets (2^16^).[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

This method has the potential to complete Path MTU Discovery (PMTUD) in
a single round-trip time, even over paths that have successive links,
each with a lower MTU.[¶](#section-1-4){.pilcrow}

The mechanism defined in this document is focused on unicast; it does
not describe multicast. That is left for future
work.[¶](#section-1-5){.pilcrow}

::: {#Intro1}
::: {#section-1.1 .section}
### [1.1.](#section-1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Example Operation](#name-example-operation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-example-operation}

The figure below illustrates the operation of the method. In this case,
the path between the source host and the destination host comprises
three links: the source has a link MTU of size MTU-S, the link between
routers R1 and R2 has an MTU of size 9000 bytes, and the final link to
the destination has an MTU of size MTU-D.[¶](#section-1.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-an-example-path-between-the}

::: {#fig1}
::: {#section-1.1-2.1 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
    +--------+         +----+        +----+         +-------+
    |        |         |    |        |    |         |       |
    | Sender +---------+ R1 +--------+ R2 +-------- + Dest. |
    |        |         |    |        |    |         |       |
    +--------+  MTU-S  +----+  9000B +----+  MTU-D  +-------+
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [An Example Path between the Source
Host and the Destination
Host](#name-an-example-path-between-the){.selfRef}
:::

Three scenarios are described:[¶](#section-1.1-3){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-1.1-4.1}
    Scenario 1 considers all links to have a 9000 byte MTU, and the
    method is supported by both routers. The initial Min-PMTU is not
    modified along the path. Therefore, the PMTU is 9000
    bytes.[¶](#section-1.1-4.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-1.1-4.2}
    Scenario 2 considers the link between R2 and the destination host
    (MTU-D) to have an MTU of 1500 bytes. This is the smallest MTU.
    Router R2 updates the Min-PMTU to 1500 bytes, and the method
    correctly updates the PMTU to 1500 bytes. Had there been another
    smaller MTU at a link further along the path that also supports the
    method, the lower MTU would also have been
    detected.[¶](#section-1.1-4.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-1.1-4.3}
    Scenario 3 considers the case where the router preceding the
    smallest link (R2) does not support the method, and the link to the
    destination host (MTU-D) has an MTU of 1500 bytes. Therefore, router
    R2 does not update the Min-PMTU to 1500 bytes. The method then fails
    to detect the actual PMTU.[¶](#section-1.1-4.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

In Scenarios 2 and 3, a lower PMTU would also fail to be detected in the
case where PMTUD had been used and an ICMPv6 Packet Too Big (PTB)
message had not been delivered to the sender
\[[RFC8201](#RFC8201){.xref}\].[¶](#section-1.1-5){.pilcrow}

These scenarios are summarized in the table below. \"H\" in R1 and/or R2
columns means the router understands the MinPMTU HBH
Option.[¶](#section-1.1-6){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-three-scenarios-that-arise-}

      MTU-S    MTU-D    R1   R2   Rec PMTU   Note
  --- -------- -------- ---- ---- ---------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   9000 B   9000 B   H    H    9000 B     Endpoints attempt to use a 9000 B PMTU.
  2   9000 B   1500 B   H    H    1500 B     Endpoints attempt to use a 1500 B PMTU.
  3   9000 B   1500 B   H    \-   9000 B     Endpoints attempt to use a 9000 B PMTU but need to implement a method to fall back to discover and use a 1500 B PMTU.

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [Three Scenarios That Arise from
  Using the Path Shown in Figure
  1](#name-three-scenarios-that-arise-){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#Intro2}
::: {#section-1.2 .section}
### [1.2.](#section-1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Use of the IPv6 Hop-by-Hop Options Header](#name-use-of-the-ipv6-hop-by-hop-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-use-of-the-ipv6-hop-by-hop-}

As specified in \[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\], IPv6 allows nodes to
optionally process the Hop-by-Hop header. Specifically, from [Section
4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8200#section-4){.relref} of
\[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\]:[¶](#section-1.2-1){.pilcrow}

> The Hop-by-Hop Options header is not inserted or deleted, but may be
> examined or processed by any node along a packet\'s delivery path,
> until the packet reaches the node (or each of the set of nodes, in the
> case of multicast) identified in the Destination Address field of the
> IPv6 header. The Hop-by-Hop Options header, when present, must
> immediately follow the IPv6 header. Its presence is indicated by the
> value zero in the Next Header field of the IPv6
> header.[¶](#section-1.2-2.1){.pilcrow}
>
> NOTE: While \[[RFC2460](#RFC2460){.xref}\] required that all nodes
> must examine and process the Hop-by-Hop Options header, it is now
> expected that nodes along a packet\'s delivery path only examine and
> process the Hop-by-Hop Options header if explicitly configured to do
> so.[¶](#section-1.2-2.2){.pilcrow}

The Hop-by-Hop Option defined in this document is designed to take
advantage of this property of how Hop-by-Hop Options are processed.
Nodes that do not support this Option [SHOULD]{.bcp14} ignore them. This
can mean that the Min-PMTU value does not account for all links along a
path.[¶](#section-1.2-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#motivation}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [Motivation and Problem Solved](#name-motivation-and-problem-solv){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-motivation-and-problem-solv}

The current state of Path MTU Discovery on the Internet is problematic.
The mechanisms defined in \[[RFC8201](#RFC8201){.xref}\] are known to
not work well in all environments. It fails to work in various cases,
including when nodes in the middle of the network do not send ICMPv6 PTB
messages or rate-limited ICMPv6 messages or do not have a return path to
the source host. This results in many transport-layer connections being
configured to use smaller packets (e.g., 1280 bytes) by default and
makes it difficult to take advantage of paths with a larger PMTU where
they do exist. Applications that send large packets are forced to use
IPv6 fragmentation \[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\], which can reduce the
reliability of Internet communication
\[[RFC8900](#RFC8900){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

Encapsulations and network-layer tunnels further reduce the payload size
available for a transport protocol to use. Also, some use cases increase
packet overhead, for example, Network Virtualization Using Generic
Routing Encapsulation (NVGRE) \[[RFC7637](#RFC7637){.xref}\]
encapsulates Layer 2 (L2) packets in an outer IP header and does not
allow IP fragmentation.[¶](#section-2-2){.pilcrow}

Sending larger packets can improve host performance, e.g., avoiding
limits to packet processing by the packet rate. An example of this is
how the packet-per-second rate required to reach wire speed on a 10G
link with 1280 byte packets is about 977K packets per second (pps) vs.
139K pps for 9000 byte packets.[¶](#section-2-3){.pilcrow}

The purpose of this document is to improve the situation by defining a
mechanism that does not rely on reception of ICMPv6 PTB messages from
nodes in the middle of the network. Instead, this provides information
to the destination host about the Minimum Path MTU and sends this
information back to the source host. This is expected to work better
than the current mechanisms based on
\[[RFC8201](#RFC8201){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2-4){.pilcrow}

A similar mechanism was proposed in 1988 for IPv4 in
\[[RFC1063](#RFC1063){.xref}\] by Jeff Mogul, C. Kent, Craig Partridge,
and Keith McCloghire. It was later obsoleted in 1990 by
\[[RFC1191](#RFC1191){.xref}\], which is the current deployed approach
to Path MTU Discovery. In contrast, the method described in this
document uses the Hop-by-Hop Option of IPv6. It does not replace PMTUD
\[[RFC8201](#RFC8201){.xref}\], Packetization Layer Path MTU Discovery
(PLPMTUD) \[[RFC4821](#RFC4821){.xref}\], or Datagram Packetization
Layer PMTU Discovery (DPLPMTUD) \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\] but
rather is designed to compliment these
methods.[¶](#section-2-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Requirements Language](#name-requirements-language){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-requirements-language}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#app-state}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Applicability Statements](#name-applicability-statements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-applicability-statements}

The Path MTU Option is designed for environments where there is control
over the hosts and nodes that connect them and where there is more than
one MTU size in use, for example, in data centers and on paths between
data centers to allow hosts to better take advantage of a path that is
able to support a large PMTU.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

The design of the Option is so sufficiently simple that it can be
executed on a router\'s fast path. A successful experiment depends on
both implementation by host and router vendors and deployment by
operators. The contained use case of connections within and between data
centers could be a driver for deployment.[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}

The method could also be useful in other environments, including the
general Internet, and offers an advantage when this Hop-by-Hop Option is
supported on all paths. The method is more robust when used to probe the
path using packets that do not carry application data and when also
paired with a method like Packetization Layer PMTUD
\[[RFC4821](#RFC4821){.xref}\] or Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU
Discovery (DPLPMTUD)
\[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\].[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#HBH}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [IPv6 Minimum Path MTU Hop-by-Hop Option](#name-ipv6-minimum-path-mtu-hop-b){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ipv6-minimum-path-mtu-hop-b}

The Minimum Path MTU Hop-by-Hop Option has the following
format:[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-format-of-the-minimum-path-}

::: {#section-5-2.1 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
     Option    Option    Option
      Type    Data Len   Data
    +--------+--------+--------+--------+---------+-------+-+
    |BBCTTTTT|00000100|     Min-PMTU    |     Rtn-PMTU    |R|
    +--------+--------+--------+--------+---------+-------+-+
:::

[Figure 2](#figure-2){.selfRef}: [Format of the Minimum Path MTU
Hop-by-Hop Option](#name-format-of-the-minimum-path-){.selfRef}

Option Type (see [Section
4.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8200#section-4.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\]):[¶](#section-5-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-5-4 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
      BB     00   Skip over this Option and continue processing.

      C       1   Option Data can change en route to the packet's final
                  destination.

      TTTTT 10000 Option Type assigned from IANA [IANA-HBH].

      Length:  4  The size of the value field in Option Data
                  field supports PMTU values from 0 to 65,534
                  octets, the maximum size represented by the
                  Path MTU Option.


      Min-PMTU: n 16-bits.  The minimum MTU recorded along the path
                  in octets, reflecting the smallest link MTU that
                  the packet experienced along the path.
                  A value less than the IPv6 minimum link
                  MTU [RFC8200] MUST be ignored.

      Rtn-PMTU: n 15-bits.  The returned Path MTU field, carrying the 15
                  most significant bits of the latest received Min-PMTU
                  field for the forward path.  The value zero means that
                  no Reported MTU is being returned.

      R        n  1-bit.  R-Flag.   Set by the source to signal that
                  the destination host should include the received
                  Rtn-PMTU field updated by the reported Min-PMTU value
                  when the destination host is to send a PMTU Option back
                  to the source host.

[¶](#section-5-4){.pilcrow}
:::

NOTE: The encoding of the final two octets (Rtn-PMTU and R-Flag) could
be implemented by a mask of the latest received Min-PMTU value with
0xFFFE, discarding the right-most bit and then performing a logical
\'OR\' with the R-Flag value of the sender. This encoding fits in the
minimum-sized Hop-by-Hop Option header.[¶](#section-5-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Behavior}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Router, Host, and Transport Layer Behaviors](#name-router-host-and-transport-l){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-router-host-and-transport-l}

::: {#router}
::: {#section-6.1 .section}
### [6.1.](#section-6.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Router Behavior](#name-router-behavior){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-router-behavior}

Routers that are not configured to support Hop-by-Hop Options are not
expected to examine or process the contents of this Option
\[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.1-1){.pilcrow}

Routers that support Hop-by-Hop Options but are not configured to
support this Option [SHOULD]{.bcp14} skip over this Option and continue
to process the header
\[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.1-2){.pilcrow}

Routers that support this Option [MUST]{.bcp14} compare the value of the
Min-PMTU field with the MTU configured for the outgoing link. If the MTU
of the outgoing link is less than the Min-PMTU, the router rewrites the
Min-PMTU in the Option to use the smaller value. (The router processing
is performed without checking the valid range of the Min-PMTU or the
Rtn-PMTU fields.)[¶](#section-6.1-3){.pilcrow}

A router [MUST]{.bcp14} ignore and [MUST NOT]{.bcp14} change the
Rtn-PMTU field or the R-Flag in the Option.[¶](#section-6.1-4){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#host-os}
::: {#section-6.2 .section}
### [6.2.](#section-6.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Host Operating System Behavior](#name-host-operating-system-behav){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-host-operating-system-behav}

The PMTU entry associated with the destination in the host\'s
destination cache \[[RFC4861](#RFC4861){.xref}\] [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be
updated after detecting a change using the IPv6 Minimum Path MTU
Hop-by-Hop Option. This cached value can be used by other flows that
share the host\'s destination cache.[¶](#section-6.2-1){.pilcrow}

The value in the host destination cache [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be used by
PLPMTUD to select an initial PMTU for a flow. The cached PMTU is only
increased by PLPMTUD when the Packetization Layer determines the path
actually supports a larger PMTU \[[RFC4821](#RFC4821){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.2-2){.pilcrow}

When requested to send an IPv6 packet with the MinPMTU HBH Option, the
source host includes the Option in an outgoing packet. The source host
[MUST]{.bcp14} fill the Min-PMTU field with the MTU configured for the
link over which it will send the packet on the next hop towards the
destination host.[¶](#section-6.2-3){.pilcrow}

When a host includes the Option in a packet it sends, the host
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} set the Rtn-PMTU field to the previously cached value
of the received Minimum Path MTU for the flow in the Rtn-PMTU field (see
[Section 6.3.3](#transportrec){.xref}). If this value is not set (for
example, because there is no cached reported Min-PMTU value), the
Rtn-PMTU field value [MUST]{.bcp14} be set to
zero.[¶](#section-6.2-4){.pilcrow}

The source host [MAY]{.bcp14} request the destination host to return the
reported Min-PMTU value by setting the R-Flag in the Option of an
outgoing packet. The R-Flag [SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14} be set when the MinPMTU
HBH Option was sent solely to provide requested feedback on the return
Path MTU to avoid each response generating another
response.[¶](#section-6.2-5){.pilcrow}

The destination host controls when to send a packet with this Option in
response to an R-Flag, as well as which packets to include it in. The
destination host [MAY]{.bcp14} limit the rate at which it sends these
packets.[¶](#section-6.2-6){.pilcrow}

A destination host only sets the R-Flag if it wishes the source host to
also return the discovered PMTU value for the path from the destination
to the source.[¶](#section-6.2-7){.pilcrow}

The normal sequence of operation of the R-Flag using the terminology
from the diagram in [Figure 1](#fig1){.xref}
is:[¶](#section-6.2-8){.pilcrow}

1.  ::: {#section-6.2-9.1}
    The source sends a probe to the destination. The sender sets the
    R-Flag.[¶](#section-6.2-9.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

2.  ::: {#section-6.2-9.2}
    The destination responds by sending a probe including the received
    Min-PMTU as the Rtn-PMTU. A destination that does not wish to probe
    the return path sets the R-Flag to
    0.[¶](#section-6.2-9.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#Transport}
::: {#section-6.3 .section}
### [6.3.](#section-6.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Transport Layer Behavior](#name-transport-layer-behavior){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-transport-layer-behavior}

This Hop-by-Hop Option is intended to be used with a Path MTU Discovery
method.[¶](#section-6.3-1){.pilcrow}

PLPMTUD \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\] uses probe packets for two
distinct functions:[¶](#section-6.3-2){.pilcrow}

-   [Probe packets are used to confirm connectivity. Such probes can be
    of any size up to the Packetization Layer Path MTU (PLPMTU). These
    probe packets are sent to solicit a response using the path to the
    remote node. These probe packets can carry the Hop-by-Hop PMTU
    Option, providing the final size of the packet does not exceed the
    current PLPMTU. After validating that the packet originates from the
    path ([Section
    4.6.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8899#section-4.6.1){.relref}
    of \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\]), the PLPMTUD method can use the
    reported size from the Hop-by-Hop Option as the next search point
    when it resumes the search algorithm. (This use resembles the use of
    the PTB_SIZE information in [Section
    4.6.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8899#section-4.6.2){.relref}
    of
    \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\].)[¶](#section-6.3-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3-3.1}
-   [A second use of probe packets is to explore if a path supports a
    packet size greater than the current PLPMTU. If this probe packet is
    successfully delivered (as determined by the source host), then the
    PLPMTU is raised to the size of the successful probe. These probe
    packets do not usually set the Path MTU Hop-by-Hop Option. See
    [Section
    1.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8899#section-1.2){.relref} of
    \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\]. [Section
    4.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8899#section-4.1){.relref} of
    \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\] also describes ways that a probe
    packet can be constructed, depending on whether the probe packets
    carry application
    data.[¶](#section-6.3-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3-3.2}

The PMTU Hop-by-Hop Option probe can be sent on packets that include
application data but needs to be robust to potential loss of the packet
(i.e., with the possibility that retransmission might be needed if the
packet is lost).[¶](#section-6.3-4){.pilcrow}

Using a PMTU probe on packets that do not carry application data will
avoid the need for loss recovery if a router on the path drops packets
that set this Option. (This avoids the transport needing to retransmit a
lost packet that includes this Option.) This is the normal default
format for both uses of probes.[¶](#section-6.3-5){.pilcrow}

::: {#transportsend}
::: {#section-6.3.1 .section}
#### [6.3.1.](#section-6.3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Including the Option in an Outgoing Packet](#name-including-the-option-in-an-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-including-the-option-in-an-}

The upper-layer protocol can request the MinPMTU HBH Option to be
included in an outgoing IPv6 packet. A transport protocol (or
upper-layer protocol) can include this Option only on specific packets
used to test the path. This Option does not need to be included in all
packets belonging to a flow.[¶](#section-6.3.1-1){.pilcrow}

NOTE: Including this Option in a large packet (e.g., one larger than the
present PMTU) is not likely to be useful, since the large packet would
itself be dropped by any link along the path with a smaller MTU,
preventing the Min-PMTU information from reaching the destination
host.[¶](#section-6.3.1-2){.pilcrow}

Discussion:[¶](#section-6.3.1-3){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-6.3.1-4.1}
    In the case of TCP, the Option could be included in a packet that
    carries a TCP segment sent after the connection is established. A
    segment without data could be used to avoid the need to retransmit
    this data if the probe packet is lost. The discovered value can be
    used to inform PLPMTUD
    \[[RFC4821](#RFC4821){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.3.1-4.1.1){.pilcrow}

    NOTE: A TCP SYN can also negotiate the Maximum Segment Size (MSS),
    which acts as an upper limit to the packet size that can be sent by
    a TCP sender. If this Option were to be included in a TCP SYN, it
    could increase the probability that the SYN segment is lost when
    routers on the path drop packets with this Option (see [Section
    6.3.6](#HBHblackhole){.xref}), which could have an unwanted impact
    on the result of racing Options
    \[[TAPS-ARCH](#I-D.ietf-taps-arch){.xref}\] or feature
    negotiation.[¶](#section-6.3.1-4.1.2){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-6.3.1-4.2}
    The use with datagram transport protocols (e.g., UDP) is harder to
    characterize because applications using datagram transports range
    from very short-lived (low data-volume applications) exchanges to
    longer (bulk) exchanges of packets between the source and
    destination hosts
    \[[RFC8085](#RFC8085){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.3.1-4.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-6.3.1-4.3}
    Simple-exchange protocols (i.e., low data-volume applications
    \[[RFC8085](#RFC8085){.xref}\] that only send one or a few packets
    per transaction) might assume that the PMTU is symmetrical. That is,
    the PMTU is the same in both directions or at least not smaller for
    the return path. This optimization does not hold when the paths are
    not symmetric.[¶](#section-6.3.1-4.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-6.3.1-4.4}
    The MinPMTU HBH Option can be used with ICMPv6
    \[[RFC4443](#RFC4443){.xref}\]. This requires a response from the
    remote node and therefore is restricted to use with ICMPv6 echo
    messages. The MinPMTU HBH Option could provide additional
    information about the PMTU that might be supported by a path. This
    could be used as a diagnostic tool to measure the PMTU of a path. As
    with other uses, the actual supported PMTU is only confirmed after
    receiving a response to a subsequent probe of the PMTU
    size.[¶](#section-6.3.1-4.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-6.3.1-4.5}
    A datagram transport can utilize DPLPMTUD
    \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\]. For example, QUIC (see [Section
    14.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9000#section-14.3){.relref}
    of \[[RFC9000](#RFC9000){.xref}\]) can use DPLPMTUD to determine
    whether the path to a destination will support a desired maximum
    datagram size. When using the IPv6 MinPMTU HBH Option, the Option
    could be added to an additional QUIC PMTU probe that is of minimal
    size (or one no larger than the currently supported PMTU size). Once
    the return Path MTU value in the MinPMTU HBH Option has been
    learned, DPLPMTUD can be triggered to test for a larger PLPMTU using
    an appropriately sized PLPMTU probe packet (see [Section
    5.3.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8899#section-5.3.1){.relref}
    of
    \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-6.3.1-4.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-6.3.1-4.6}
    The use of this Option with DNS and DNSSEC over UDP is expected to
    work for paths where the PMTU is symmetric. The DNS server will
    learn the PMTU from the DNS query messages. If the Rtn-PMTU value is
    smaller, then a large DNSSEC response might be dropped and the known
    problems with PMTUD will then occur. DNS and DNSSEC over transport
    protocols that can carry the PMTU ought to
    work.[¶](#section-6.3.1-4.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-6.3.1-4.7}
    This method also can be used with anycast to discover the PMTU of
    the path, but the use needs to be aware that the anycast binding
    might change.[¶](#section-6.3.1-4.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#transportvalid}
::: {#section-6.3.2 .section}
#### [6.3.2.](#section-6.3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Validation of the Packet that Includes the Option](#name-validation-of-the-packet-th){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-validation-of-the-packet-th}

An upper-layer protocol (e.g., transport endpoint) using this Option
needs to provide protection from data injection attacks by off-path
devices \[[RFC8085](#RFC8085){.xref}\]. This requires a method to assure
that the information in the Option Data is provided by a node on the
path. This validates that the packet forms a part of an existing flow,
using context available at the upper layer. For example, a TCP
connection or UDP application that maintains the related state and uses
a randomized ephemeral port would provide this basic validation to
protect from off-path data injection; see [Section
5.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8085#section-5.1){.relref} of
\[[RFC8085](#RFC8085){.xref}\]. IPsec \[[RFC4301](#RFC4301){.xref}\] and
TLS \[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] provide greater
assurance.[¶](#section-6.3.2-1){.pilcrow}

The upper layer discards any received packet when the packet validation
fails. When packet validation fails, the upper layer [MUST]{.bcp14} also
discard the associated Option Data from the MinPMTU HBH Option without
further processing.[¶](#section-6.3.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#transportrec}
::: {#section-6.3.3 .section}
#### [6.3.3.](#section-6.3.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Receiving the Option](#name-receiving-the-option){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-receiving-the-option}

For a connection-oriented upper-layer protocol, caching of the received
Min-PMTU could be implemented by saving the value in the connection
context at the transport layer. A connectionless upper layer (e.g., one
using UDP) requires the upper-layer protocol to cache the value for each
flow it uses.[¶](#section-6.3.3-1){.pilcrow}

A destination host that receives a MinPMTU HBH Option with the R-Flag
[SHOULD]{.bcp14} include the MinPMTU HBH Option in the next outgoing
IPv6 packet for the corresponding flow.[¶](#section-6.3.3-2){.pilcrow}

A simple mechanism could only include this Option (with the Rtn-PMTU
field set) the first time this Option is received or when it notifies a
change in the Minimum Path MTU. This limits the number of packets,
including the Option packets, that are sent. However, this does not
provide robustness to packet loss or recovery after a sender loses
state.[¶](#section-6.3.3-3){.pilcrow}

Discussion:[¶](#section-6.3.3-4){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-6.3.3-5.1}
    Some upper-layer protocols send packets less frequently than the
    rate at which the host receives packets. This provides less frequent
    feedback of the received Rtn-PMTU value. However, a host always
    sends the most recent Rtn-PMTU
    value.[¶](#section-6.3.3-5.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#Rtn-MTU}
::: {#section-6.3.4 .section}
#### [6.3.4.](#section-6.3.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Using the Rtn-PMTU Field](#name-using-the-rtn-pmtu-field){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-using-the-rtn-pmtu-field}

The Rtn-PMTU field provides an indication of the PMTU from on-path
routers. It does not necessarily reflect the actual PMTU between the
source and destination hosts. Care therefore needs to be exercised in
using the Rtn-PMTU value. Specifically:[¶](#section-6.3.4-1){.pilcrow}

-   [The actual PMTU can be lower than the Rtn-PMTU value because the
    Min-PMTU field was not updated by a router on the path that did not
    process the
    Option.[¶](#section-6.3.4-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3.4-2.1}
-   [The actual PMTU may be lower than the Rtn-PMTU value because there
    is a Layer 2 device with a lower
    MTU.[¶](#section-6.3.4-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3.4-2.2}
-   [The actual PMTU may be larger than the Rtn-PMTU value because of a
    corrupted, delayed, or misordered response. A source host
    [MUST]{.bcp14} ignore a Rtn-PMTU value larger than the MTU
    configured for the outgoing
    link.[¶](#section-6.3.4-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3.4-2.3}
-   [The path might have changed between the time when the probe was
    sent and when the Rtn-PMTU value
    received.[¶](#section-6.3.4-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-6.3.4-2.4}

IPv6 requires that every link in the Internet have an MTU of 1280 octets
or greater. A node [MUST]{.bcp14} ignore a Rtn-PMTU value less than 1280
octets \[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\].[¶](#section-6.3.4-3){.pilcrow}

To avoid unintentional dropping of packets that exceed the actual PMTU
(e.g., Scenario 3 in [Section 1.1](#Intro1){.xref}), the source host can
delay increasing the PMTU until a probe packet with the size of the
Rtn-PMTU value has been successfully acknowledged by the upper layer,
confirming that the path supports the larger PMTU. This probing
increases robustness but adds one additional path round-trip time before
the PMTU is updated. This use resembles that of PTB messages in [Section
4.6](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8899#section-4.6){.relref} of
DPLPMTUD \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\] (with the important difference
being that a PTB message can only seek to lower the PMTU, whereas this
Option could trigger a probe packet to seek to increase the
PMTU).[¶](#section-6.3.4-4){.pilcrow}

[Section
5.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8201#section-5.2){.relref} of
\[[RFC8201](#RFC8201){.xref}\] provides guidance on the caching of PMTU
information and also the relation to IPv6 flow labels. Implementations
should consider the impact of Equal-Cost Multipath (ECMP)
\[[RFC6438](#RFC6438){.xref}\], specifically, whether a PMTU ought to be
maintained for each transport endpoint or for each network
address.[¶](#section-6.3.4-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-6.3.5 .section}
#### [6.3.5.](#section-6.3.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Detecting Path Changes](#name-detecting-path-changes){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-detecting-path-changes}

Path characteristics can change, and the actual PMTU could increase or
decrease over time, for instance, following a path change when packets
are forwarded over a link with a different MTU than that previously
used. To bound the delay in discovering an increase in the actual PMTU,
a host with a link MTU larger than the current PMTU [SHOULD]{.bcp14}
periodically send the MinPMTU HBH Option with the R-bit set. DPLPMTUD
provides recommendations concerning how this could be implemented (see
[Section
5.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8899#section-5.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\]). Since the Option consumes less capacity
than a full-sized probe packet, there can be an advantage in using this
to detect a change in the path
characteristics.[¶](#section-6.3.5-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#HBHblackhole}
::: {#section-6.3.6 .section}
#### [6.3.6.](#section-6.3.6){.section-number .selfRef} [Detection of Dropping Packets that Include the Option](#name-detection-of-dropping-packe){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-detection-of-dropping-packe}

There is evidence that some middleboxes drop packets that include
Hop-by-Hop Options. For example, a firewall might drop a packet that
carries an unknown extension header or Option. This practice is expected
to decrease as an Option becomes more widely used. It could result in
the generation of an ICMPv6 message that indicates the problem. This
could be used to (temporarily) suspend use of this
Option.[¶](#section-6.3.6-1){.pilcrow}

A middlebox that silently discards a packet with this Option results in
the dropping of any packet using the Option. This dropping can be
avoided by appropriate configuration in a controlled environment, such
as within a data center, but it needs to be considered for Internet
usage. [Section 6.2](#host-os){.xref} recommends that this Option is not
used on packets where loss might adversely impact
performance.[¶](#section-6.3.6-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has registered an IPv6 Hop-by-Hop Option type in the \"Destination
Options and Hop-by-Hop Options\" registry within the \"Internet Protocol
Version 6 (IPv6) Parameters\" registry group
\[[IANA-HBH](#IANA-HBH){.xref}\]. This assignment is shown in [Section
5](#HBH){.xref}.[¶](#section-7-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-8 .section}
## [8.](#section-8){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

This section discusses the security considerations. It first reviews
router Option processing. It then reviews host processing when receiving
this Option at the network layer. It then considers two ways in which
the Option Data can be processed, followed by two approaches for using
the Option Data. Finally, it discusses middlebox implications related to
use in the general Internet.[¶](#section-8-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#Security-router}
::: {#section-8.1 .section}
### [8.1.](#section-8.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Router Option Processing](#name-router-option-processing){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-router-option-processing}

This Option shares the characteristics of all other IPv6 Hop-by-Hop
Options, in that, if not supported at line rate, it could be used to
degrade the performance of a router. This Option, while simple, is no
different than other uses of IPv6 Hop-by-Hop
Options.[¶](#section-8.1-1){.pilcrow}

It is common for routers to ignore the Hop-by-Hop Option header or to
drop packets containing a Hop-by-Hop Option header. Routers implementing
IPv6 according to \[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.xref}\] only examine and
process the Hop-by-Hop Options header if explicitly configured to do
so.[¶](#section-8.1-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security-net}
::: {#section-8.2 .section}
### [8.2.](#section-8.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Network-Layer Host Processing](#name-network-layer-host-processi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-network-layer-host-processi}

A malicious attacker can forge a packet directed at a host that carries
the MinPMTU HBH Option. By design, the fields of this IP Option can be
modified by the network.[¶](#section-8.2-1){.pilcrow}

For comparison, the ICMPv6 PTB message used in Path MTU Discovery
\[[RFC8201](#RFC8201){.xref}\] and the source host have an inherent
trust relationship with the destination host including this Option. This
trust relationship can be used to help verify the Option. ICMPv6 PTB
messages are sent from any router on the path to the destination host.
The source host has no prior knowledge of these routers (except for the
first hop router).[¶](#section-8.2-2){.pilcrow}

Reception of this packet will require processing as the network stack
parses the packet before the packet is delivered to the upper-layer
protocol. This network-layer Option processing is normally completed
before any upper-layer protocol delivery checks are
performed.[¶](#section-8.2-3){.pilcrow}

The network layer does not normally have sufficient information to
validate that the packet carrying an Option originated from the
destination (or an on-path node). It also does not typically have
sufficient context to demultiplex the packet to identify the related
transport flow. This can mean that any changes resulting from reception
of the Option applies to all flows between a pair of
endpoints.[¶](#section-8.2-4){.pilcrow}

These considerations are no different than other uses of Hop-by-Hop
Options, and this is the use case for PMTUD. The following section
describes a mitigation for this attack.[¶](#section-8.2-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security-upp}
::: {#section-8.3 .section}
### [8.3.](#section-8.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Validating Use of the Option Data](#name-validating-use-of-the-optio){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-validating-use-of-the-optio}

Transport protocols should be designed to provide protection from data
injection attacks by off-path devices, and mechanisms should be
described in the Security Considerations section for each transport
specification (see [Section
5.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8085#section-5.1){.relref} of
\"UDP Usage Guidelines\" \[[RFC8085](#RFC8085){.xref}\]). For example, a
TCP or UDP application that maintains the related state and uses a
randomized ephemeral port would provide basic protection. TLS
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] or IPsec \[[RFC4301](#RFC4301){.xref}\]
provide cryptographic authentication. An upper-layer protocol that
validates each received packet discards any packet when this validation
fails. In this case, the host [MUST]{.bcp14} also discard the associated
Option Data from the MinPMTU HBH Option without further processing
([Section 6.3](#Transport){.xref}).[¶](#section-8.3-1){.pilcrow}

A network node on the path has visibility of all packets it forwards. By
observing the network packet payload, the node might be able to
construct a packet that might be validated by the destination host. Such
a node would also be able to drop or limit the flow in other ways that
could be potentially more disruptive. Authenticating the packet, for
example, using IPsec \[[RFC4301](#RFC4301){.xref}\] or TLS
\[[RFC8446](#RFC8446){.xref}\] mitigates this attack. Note that the
authentication style of the Authentication Header (AH)
\[[RFC4302](#RFC4302){.xref}\], while authenticating the payload and
outer IPv6 header, does not check Hop-by-Hop Options that change on
route.[¶](#section-8.3-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security-pmtud}
::: {#section-8.4 .section}
### [8.4.](#section-8.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Direct Use of the Rtn-PMTU Value](#name-direct-use-of-the-rtn-pmtu-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-direct-use-of-the-rtn-pmtu-}

The simplest way to utilize the Rtn-PMTU value is to directly use this
to update the PMTU. This approach results in a set of security issues
when the Option carries malicious data:[¶](#section-8.4-1){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#section-8.4-2.1}
    A direct update of the PMTU using the Rtn-PMTU value could result in
    an attacker inflating or reducing the size of the host PMTU for the
    destination. Forcing a reduction in the PMTU can decrease the
    efficiency of network use, might increase the number of
    packets/fragments required to send the same volume of payload data,
    and can prevent sending an unfragmented datagram larger than the
    PMTU. Increasing the PMTU can result in a path silently dropping
    packets (described as a black hole in
    \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\]) when the source host sends packets
    larger than the actual PMTU. This persists until the PMTU is next
    updated.[¶](#section-8.4-2.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-8.4-2.2}
    The method can be used to solicit a response from the destination
    host. A malicious attacker could forge a packet that causes the
    destination to add the Option to a packet sent to the source host. A
    forged value of Rtn-PMTU in the Option Data might also impact the
    remote endpoint, as described in the previous bullet. This persists
    until a valid MinPMTU HBH Option is received. This attack could be
    mitigated by limiting the sending of the MinPMTU HBH Option in reply
    to incoming packets that carry the
    Option.[¶](#section-8.4-2.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#Security-dplpmtud}
::: {#section-8.5 .section}
### [8.5.](#section-8.5){.section-number .selfRef} [Using the Rtn-PMTU Value as a Hint for Probing](#name-using-the-rtn-pmtu-value-as){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-using-the-rtn-pmtu-value-as}

Another way to utilize the Rtn-PMTU value is to indirectly trigger a
probe to determine if the path supports a PMTU of size Rtn-PMTU. This
approach needs context for the flow and hence assumes an upper-layer
protocol that validates the packet that carries the Option (see [Section
8.3](#Security-upp){.xref}). This is the case when used in combination
with DPLPMTUD \[[RFC8899](#RFC8899){.xref}\]. A set of security
considerations result when an Option carries malicious
data:[¶](#section-8.5-1){.pilcrow}

-   [If the forged packet carries a validated Option with a non-zero
    Rtn-PMTU field, the upper-layer protocol could utilize the
    information in the Rtn-PMTU field. A Rtn-PMTU larger than the
    current PMTU can trigger a probe for a new
    size.[¶](#section-8.5-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-8.5-2.1}
-   [If the forged packet carries a non-zero Min-PMTU field, the
    upper-layer protocol would change the cached information about the
    path from the source. The cached information at the destination host
    will be overwritten when the host receives another packet that
    includes a MinPMTU HBH Option corresponding to the
    flow.[¶](#section-8.5-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-8.5-2.2}
-   [Processing of the Option could cause a destination host to add the
    MinPMTU HBH Option to a packet sent to the source host. This Option
    will carry a Rtn-PMTU value that could have been updated by the
    forged packet. The impact of the source host receiving this
    resembles that discussed
    previously.[¶](#section-8.5-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-8.5-2.3}
:::
:::

::: {#Security-mbox}
::: {#section-8.6 .section}
### [8.6.](#section-8.6){.section-number .selfRef} [Impact of Middleboxes](#name-impact-of-middleboxes){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-impact-of-middleboxes}

There is evidence that some middleboxes drop packets that include
Hop-by-Hop Options. For example, a firewall might drop a packet that
carries an unknown extension header or Option. This practice is expected
to decrease as the Option becomes more widely used. Methods to address
this are discussed in [Section
6.3.6](#HBHblackhole){.xref}.[¶](#section-8.6-1){.pilcrow}

When a forged packet causes a packet that includes the MinPMTU HBH
Option to be sent and the return path does not forward packets with this
Option, the packet will be dropped (see [Section
6.3.6](#HBHblackhole){.xref}). This attack is mitigated by validating
the Option Data before use and by limiting the rate of responses
generated. An upper layer could further mitigate the impact by
responding to an R-Flag by including the Option in a packet that does
not carry application data.[¶](#section-8.6-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#EXP}
::: {#section-9 .section}
## [9.](#section-9){.section-number .selfRef} [Experiment Goals](#name-experiment-goals){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-experiment-goals}

This section describes the experimental goals of this
specification.[¶](#section-9-1){.pilcrow}

A successful deployment of the method depends upon several components
being implemented and deployed:[¶](#section-9-2){.pilcrow}

-   [Support in the sending node (see [Section 6.2](#host-os){.xref}).
    This also requires corresponding support in upper-layer protocols
    (see [Section
    6.3](#Transport){.xref}).[¶](#section-9-3.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-3.1}
-   [Router support in nodes (see [Section 6.1](#router){.xref}). The
    IETF continues to provide recommendations on the use of IPv6
    Hop-by-Hop Options, for example, see [Section
    2.2.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9099#section-2.2.2){.relref}
    of \[[RFC9099](#RFC9099){.xref}\]. This document does not update the
    way router implementations configure support for Hop-by-Hop
    Options.[¶](#section-9-3.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-3.2}
-   [Support in the receiving node (see [Section
    6.3.3](#transportrec){.xref}).[¶](#section-9-3.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-3.3}

Experience from deployment is an expected input to any decision to
progress this specification from Experimental to IETF Standards Track.
Appropriate inputs might include:[¶](#section-9-4){.pilcrow}

-   [reports of implementation
    experience,[¶](#section-9-5.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-5.1}
-   [measurements of the number paths where the method can be used,
    or[¶](#section-9-5.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-5.2}
-   [measurements showing the benefit realized or the implications of
    using specific methods over specific
    paths.[¶](#section-9-5.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-9-5.3}
:::
:::

::: {#IMP}
::: {#section-10 .section}
## [10.](#section-10){.section-number .selfRef} [Implementation Status](#name-implementation-status){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-implementation-status}

At the time this document was published, there are two known
implementations of the Path MTU Hop-by-Hop Option. These
are:[¶](#section-10-1){.pilcrow}

-   [Wireshark dissector. This is shipping in production in Wireshark
    version 3.2
    \[[WIRESHARK](#WIRESHARK){.xref}\].[¶](#section-10-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-10-2.1}
-   [A prototype in the open source version of the FD.io Vector Packet
    Processing (VPP) technology \[[VPP](#VPP){.xref}\]. At the time this
    document was published, the source code can be found
    \[[VPP_SRC](#VPP_SRC){.xref}\].[¶](#section-10-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-10-2.2}
:::
:::

::: {#section-11 .section}
## [11.](#section-11){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-11.1 .section}
### [11.1.](#section-11.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[IANA-HBH\]
:   [IANA]{.refAuthor}, [\"Destination Options and Hop-by-Hop
    Options\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.iana.org/assignments/ipv6-parameters/>\>.
:   

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8200\]
:   [Deering, S.]{.refAuthor} and [R. Hinden]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet
    Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    86]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8200]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8200]{.seriesInfo}, July 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200>\>.
:   

\[RFC8201\]
:   [McCann, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Deering, S.]{.refAuthor},
    [Mogul, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [R. Hinden, Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Path
    MTU Discovery for IP version 6\"]{.refTitle}, [STD 87]{.seriesInfo},
    [RFC 8201]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8201]{.seriesInfo}, July
    2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8201>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-11.2 .section}
### [11.2.](#section-11.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[RFC1063\]
:   [Mogul, J.]{.refAuthor}, [Kent, C.]{.refAuthor},
    [Partridge, C.]{.refAuthor}, and [K. McCloghrie]{.refAuthor}, [\"IP
    MTU discovery options\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 1063]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC1063]{.seriesInfo}, July 1988,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1063>\>.
:   

\[RFC1191\]
:   [Mogul, J.]{.refAuthor} and [S. Deering]{.refAuthor}, [\"Path MTU
    discovery\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 1191]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC1191]{.seriesInfo}, November 1990,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1191>\>.
:   

\[RFC2460\]
:   [Deering, S.]{.refAuthor} and [R. Hinden]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet
    Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    2460]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2460]{.seriesInfo}, December
    1998, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2460>\>.
:   

\[RFC4301\]
:   [Kent, S.]{.refAuthor} and [K. Seo]{.refAuthor}, [\"Security
    Architecture for the Internet Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4301]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4301]{.seriesInfo}, December
    2005, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4301>\>.
:   

\[RFC4302\]
:   [Kent, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"IP Authentication Header\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 4302]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4302]{.seriesInfo},
    December 2005, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4302>\>.
:   

\[RFC4443\]
:   [Conta, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Deering, S.]{.refAuthor}, and [M. Gupta,
    Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMPv6) for
    the Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) Specification\"]{.refTitle},
    [STD 89]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 4443]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4443]{.seriesInfo}, March 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4443>\>.
:   

\[RFC4821\]
:   [Mathis, M.]{.refAuthor} and [J. Heffner]{.refAuthor},
    [\"Packetization Layer Path MTU Discovery\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4821]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4821]{.seriesInfo}, March 2007,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4821>\>.
:   

\[RFC4861\]
:   [Narten, T.]{.refAuthor}, [Nordmark, E.]{.refAuthor},
    [Simpson, W.]{.refAuthor}, and [H. Soliman]{.refAuthor}, [\"Neighbor
    Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4861]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4861]{.seriesInfo}, September
    2007, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4861>\>.
:   

\[RFC6438\]
:   [Carpenter, B.]{.refAuthor} and [S. Amante]{.refAuthor}, [\"Using
    the IPv6 Flow Label for Equal Cost Multipath Routing and Link
    Aggregation in Tunnels\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 6438]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC6438]{.seriesInfo}, November 2011,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6438>\>.
:   

\[RFC7637\]
:   [Garg, P., Ed.]{.refAuthor} and [Y. Wang, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"NVGRE: Network Virtualization Using Generic Routing
    Encapsulation\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 7637]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC7637]{.seriesInfo}, September 2015,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7637>\>.
:   

\[RFC8085\]
:   [Eggert, L.]{.refAuthor}, [Fairhurst, G.]{.refAuthor}, and [G.
    Shepherd]{.refAuthor}, [\"UDP Usage Guidelines\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP
    145]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8085]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8085]{.seriesInfo}, March 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8085>\>.
:   

\[RFC8446\]
:   [Rescorla, E.]{.refAuthor}, [\"The Transport Layer Security (TLS)
    Protocol Version 1.3\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8446]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8446]{.seriesInfo}, August 2018,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8446>\>.
:   

\[RFC8899\]
:   [Fairhurst, G.]{.refAuthor}, [Jones, T.]{.refAuthor},
    [Tüxen, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Rüngeler, I.]{.refAuthor}, and [T.
    Völker]{.refAuthor}, [\"Packetization Layer Path MTU Discovery for
    Datagram Transports\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8899]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8899]{.seriesInfo}, September 2020,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8899>\>.
:   

\[RFC8900\]
:   [Bonica, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Baker, F.]{.refAuthor},
    [Huston, G.]{.refAuthor}, [Hinden, R.]{.refAuthor},
    [Troan, O.]{.refAuthor}, and [F. Gont]{.refAuthor}, [\"IP
    Fragmentation Considered Fragile\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP
    230]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8900]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8900]{.seriesInfo}, September 2020,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8900>\>.
:   

\[RFC9000\]
:   [Iyengar, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor} and [M. Thomson, Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [\"QUIC: A UDP-Based Multiplexed and Secure Transport\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 9000]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC9000]{.seriesInfo}, May
    2021, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9000>\>.
:   

\[RFC9099\]
:   [Vyncke, É.]{.refAuthor}, [Chittimaneni, K.]{.refAuthor},
    [Kaeo, M.]{.refAuthor}, and [E. Rey]{.refAuthor}, [\"Operational
    Security Considerations for IPv6 Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    9099]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC9099]{.seriesInfo}, August
    2021, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9099>\>.
:   

\[TAPS-ARCH\]
:   [Pauly, T., Ed.]{.refAuthor}, [Trammell, B., Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [Brunstrom, A.]{.refAuthor}, [Fairhurst, G.]{.refAuthor}, and [C.
    Perkins]{.refAuthor}, [\"An Architecture for Transport
    Services\"]{.refTitle}, [Work in Progress]{.refContent},
    [Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-taps-arch-12]{.seriesInfo}, June 2022,
    \<<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/bibxml3/draft-ietf-taps-arch.xml>\>.
:   

\[VPP\]
:   [FD.io]{.refAuthor}, [\"VPP/What is VPP?\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://wiki.fd.io/view/VPP/What_is_VPP%3F>\>.
:   

\[VPP_SRC\]
:   [\"vpp\"]{.refTitle}, [commit 21948, ip: HBH MTU recording for
    IPv6]{.refContent}, \<<https://gerrit.fd.io/r/c/vpp/+/21948>\>.
:   

\[WIRESHARK\]
:   [\"Wireshark Network Protocol Analyzer\"]{.refTitle},
    \<<https://www.wireshark.org>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#appendix}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Appendix A.](#appendix-A){.section-number .selfRef} [Examples of Usage](#name-examples-of-usage){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-examples-of-usage}

This section provides examples that illustrate a use of the MinPMTU HBH
Option by a source using DPLPMTUD to discover the PLPMTU supported by a
path. They consider a path where the on-path router has been configured
with an outgoing MTU of d\'. The source starts by transmission of
packets of size a and then uses DPLPMTUD to seek to increase the size in
steps resulting in sizes of b, c, d, e, etc. (chosen by the search
algorithm used by DPLPMTUD). The search algorithm terminates with a
PLPMTU that is at least d and is less than or equal to
d\'.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}

The first example considers DPLPMTUD without using the MinPMTU HBH
Option. In this case, DPLPMTUD searches using a probe packet that
increases in size. Probe packets of size e are sent, which are larger
than the actual PMTU. In this example, PTB messages are not received
from the routers, and repeated unsuccessful probes result in the search
phase completing. Packets of data are never sent with a size larger than
the size of the last confirmed probe packet. Acknowledgments (ACKs) of
data packets are not shown.[¶](#appendix-A-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#appendix-A-3.1 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
    ----Packets of data size a ------------------------------>
    ----Probe size b ---------------------------------------->
     <---------------------------------- ACK of probe --------
    ----Packets of data size b ------------------------------>
    ----Probe size c ---------------------------------------->
     <---------------------------------- ACK of probe --------
    ----Packets of data size c ------------------------------>
    ----Probe size d ---------------------------------------->
     <---------------------------------- ACK of probe --------
    ----Packets of data size d ------------------------------>
     <---------------------------------- ACK of probe --------
    ...
    ----Probe size e --------------X
            X----ICMPv6 PTB d' ----|
    ----Packets of data size d ------------------------------>
    ----Probe size e --------------X (again)
            X----ICMPv6 PTB d' ----|
    ----Packets of data size d ------------------------------>
    ...
    etc. until MaxProbes are unsuccessful and search phase completes.
    ----Packets of data size d ------------------------------>
:::

[Figure 3](#figure-3){.selfRef}

The second example considers DPLPMTUD with the MinPMTU HBH Option set on
a connectivity probe packet.[¶](#appendix-A-4){.pilcrow}

The IPv6 Option is sent end to end, and the Min-PMTU is updated by a
router on the path to d\', which is returned in a response that also
sets the MinPMTU HBH Option. Upon receiving the Rtn-PMTU value, DPLPMTUD
immediately sends a probe packet of the target size d\'. If the probe
packet is confirmed for the path, the PLPMTU is updated, allowing the
source to use data packets up to size d\'. (The search algorithm is
allowed to continue to probe to see if the path supports a larger size.)
Packets of data are never sent with a size larger than the last
confirmed probe size d\'.[¶](#appendix-A-5){.pilcrow}

::: {#appendix-A-6.1 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
    ----Packets of data size a ------------------------------>
    ----Connectivity probe with MinPMTU-
                                +--updated to minPMTU=d'----->
     <-----------------ACK with Rtn-PMTU=d'--------------------
    ----Packets of data size a ------------------------------>
    ----Probe size d' --------------------------------------->
     <---------------------------------- ACK of probe ---------
    -----Packets of data size d' ---------------------------->
    Search phase completes.
    -----Packets of data size d' ---------------------------->
:::

[Figure 4](#figure-4){.selfRef}

The final example considers DPLPMTUD with the MinPMTU HBH Option set on
a connectivity probe packet but shows the effect when this connectivity
probe packet is dropped.[¶](#appendix-A-7){.pilcrow}

In this case, the packet with the MinPMTU HBH Option is not received.
DPLPMTUD searches using probe packets of increasing size, increasing the
PLPMTU when the probes are confirmed. An ICMPv6 PTB message is received
when the probed size exceeds the actual PMTU, indicating a PTB_SIZE of
d\'. DPLPMTUD immediately sends a probe packet of the target size d\'.
If the probe packet is confirmed for the path, the PLPMTU is updated,
allowing the source to use data packets up to size d\'. If the ICMPv6
PTB message is not received, the DPLPMTU will be the last confirmed
probe size, which is d.[¶](#appendix-A-8){.pilcrow}

::: {#appendix-A-9.1 .Dropped .HBH .MinPMTU .Option .alignCenter .art-DPLPMTUD .art-text .artwork .with}
    ----Packets of data size a ------------------------------->
    ----Connectivity probe with MinPMTU --------X
    ----Packets of data size a ------------------------------->
    ----Probe size b ----------------------------------------->
     <---------------------------------- ACK of probe --------
    ----Packets of data size b ------------------------------->
    ----Probe size c ----------------------------------------->
     <---------------------------------- ACK of probe --------
    ----Packets of data size c ------------------------------->
    ----Probe size d ----------------------------------------->
     <---------------------------------- ACK of probe --------
    ----Packets of data size d ------------------------------->
    ----Probe size e ------------X
     <--ICMPv6 PTB PTB_SIZE d' --|
    ----Packets of data size d ------------------------------->
    ----Probe size d' using target set by PTB_SIZE ----------->
     <---------------------------------- ACK of probe --------
     Search phase completes.
    ----Packets of data size d' ------------------------------>
:::

[Figure 5](#figure-5){.selfRef}

The number of probe rounds depends on the number of steps needed by the
search algorithm and is typically larger for a larger
PMTU.[¶](#appendix-A-10){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Ack}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

Helpful comments were received from [Tom Herbert]{.contact-name}, [Tom
Jones]{.contact-name}, [Fred Templin]{.contact-name}, [Ole
Troan]{.contact-name}, [Tianran Zhou]{.contact-name}, [Jen
Linkova]{.contact-name}, [Brian Carpenter]{.contact-name}, [Peng
Shuping]{.contact-name}, [Mark Smith]{.contact-name}, [Fernando
Gont]{.contact-name}, [Michael Dougherty]{.contact-name}, [Erik
Kline]{.contact-name}, and other members of the 6MAN Working
Group.[¶](#appendix-B-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-C .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Robert M. Hinden]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Check Point Software]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[959 Skyway Road]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[San Carlos]{.locality}, [CA]{.region} [94070]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United States of America]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <bob.hinden@gmail.com>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Godred Fairhurst]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[University of Aberdeen]{.org}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[School of Engineering]{.extended-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Fraser Noble Building]{.street-address}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Aberdeen]{.locality}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[AB24 3UE]{.postal-code}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[United Kingdom]{.country-name}
:::

::: email
Email: <gorry@erg.abdn.ac.uk>
:::
:::
:::
