  RFC 9276              NSEC3 Parameter Settings   August 2022
  --------------------- -------------------------- -------------
  Hardaker & Dukhovni   Best Current Practice      \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9276](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9276){.eref}

BCP:
:   236

Updates:
:   [5155](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5155){.eref}

Category:
:   Best Current Practice

Published:
:   August 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Authors:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    W. Hardaker
    :::

    ::: org
    USC/ISI
    :::
    :::

    ::: author
    ::: author-name
    V. Dukhovni
    :::

    ::: org
    Bloomberg, L.P.
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9276 {#rfcnum}

# Guidance for NSEC3 Parameter Settings {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

NSEC3 is a DNSSEC mechanism providing proof of nonexistence by asserting
that there are no names that exist between two domain names within a
zone. Unlike its counterpart NSEC, NSEC3 avoids directly disclosing the
bounding domain name pairs. This document provides guidance on setting
NSEC3 parameters based on recent operational deployment experience. This
document updates RFC 5155 with guidance about selecting NSEC3 iteration
and salt parameters.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This memo documents an Internet Best Current
Practice.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Further information on BCPs
is available in Section 2 of RFC
7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9276>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal
Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the Revised
BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1}
        [1.1](#section-1.1){.xref}.  [Requirements
        Notation](#name-requirements-notation){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.xref}.  [NSEC3 Parameter Value
    Discussions](#name-nsec3-parameter-value-discu){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.1}
        [2.1](#section-2.1){.xref}.  [Algorithms](#name-algorithms){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.2}
        [2.2](#section-2.2){.xref}.  [Flags](#name-flags){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.3}
        [2.3](#section-2.3){.xref}.  [Iterations](#name-iterations){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2.2.4}
        [2.4](#section-2.4){.xref}.  [Salt](#name-salt){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.xref}.  [Recommendations for Deploying and
    Validating NSEC3 Records](#name-recommendations-for-deployi){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.xref}.  [Best Practice for Zone
        Publishers](#name-best-practice-for-zone-publ){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.xref}.  [Recommendation for Validating
        Resolvers](#name-recommendation-for-validati){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3}
        [3.3](#section-3.3){.xref}.  [Recommendation for Primary and
        Secondary
        Relationships](#name-recommendation-for-primary-){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.xref}.  [Operational
    Considerations](#name-operational-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.xref}.  [References](#name-references){.xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2}
        [7.2](#section-7.2){.xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [Appendix A](#appendix-A){.xref}.  [Deployment Measurements at Time
    of Publication](#name-deployment-measurements-at-){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [Appendix B](#appendix-B){.xref}.  [Computational Burdens of
    Processing NSEC3
    Iterations](#name-computational-burdens-of-pr){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#appendix-C){.xref}[Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#appendix-D){.xref}[Authors\'
    Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#introduction}
::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

As with NSEC \[[RFC4035](#RFC4035){.xref}\], NSEC3
\[[RFC5155](#RFC5155){.xref}\] provides proof of nonexistence that
consists of signed DNS records establishing the nonexistence of a given
name or associated Resource Record Type (RRTYPE) in a DNSSEC-signed zone
\[[RFC4035](#RFC4035){.xref}\]. However, in the case of NSEC3, the names
of valid nodes in the zone are obfuscated through (possibly multiple
iterations of) hashing (currently only SHA-1 is in use on the
Internet).[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

NSEC3 also provides \"opt-out support\", allowing for blocks of unsigned
delegations to be covered by a single NSEC3 record. Use of the opt-out
feature allows large registries to only sign as many NSEC3 records as
there are signed DS or other Resource Record sets (RRsets) in the zone;
with opt-out, unsigned delegations don\'t require additional NSEC3
records. This sacrifices the tamper- resistance of the proof of
nonexistence offered by NSEC3 in order to reduce memory and CPU
overheads.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

NSEC3 records have a number of tunable parameters that are specified via
an NSEC3PARAM record at the zone apex. These parameters are the hash
algorithm, the processing flags, the number of hash iterations, and the
salt. Each of these has security and operational considerations that
impact both zone owners and validating resolvers. This document provides
some best-practice recommendations for setting the NSEC3
parameters.[¶](#section-1-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#requirements-notation}
::: {#section-1.1 .section}
### [1.1.](#section-1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Requirements Notation](#name-requirements-notation){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-requirements-notation}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-1.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#nsec3-parameter-value-discussions}
::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [NSEC3 Parameter Value Discussions](#name-nsec3-parameter-value-discu){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-nsec3-parameter-value-discu}

The following sections describe the background of the parameters for the
NSEC3 and NSEC3PARAM RRTYPEs.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#algorithms}
::: {#section-2.1 .section}
### [2.1.](#section-2.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Algorithms](#name-algorithms){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-algorithms}

The algorithm field is not discussed by this document. Readers are
encouraged to read \[[RFC8624](#RFC8624){.xref}\] for guidance about
DNSSEC algorithm usage.[¶](#section-2.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#flags}
::: {#section-2.2 .section}
### [2.2.](#section-2.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Flags](#name-flags){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-flags}

The NSEC3PARAM flags field currently contains only reserved and
unassigned flags. However, individual NSEC3 records contain the
\"Opt-Out\" flag \[[RFC5155](#RFC5155){.xref}\] that specifies whether
that NSEC3 record provides proof of nonexistence. In general, NSEC3 with
the Opt-Out flag enabled should only be used in large, highly dynamic
zones with a small percentage of signed delegations. Operationally, this
allows for fewer signature creations when new delegations are inserted
into a zone. This is typically only necessary for extremely large
registration points providing zone updates faster than real-time signing
allows or when using memory-constrained hardware. Operators considering
the use of NSEC3 are advised to carefully weigh the costs and benefits
of choosing NSEC3 over NSEC. Smaller zones, or large but relatively
static zones, are encouraged to not use the opt-opt flag and to take
advantage of DNSSEC\'s authenticated denial of
existence.[¶](#section-2.2-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#iterations}
::: {#section-2.3 .section}
### [2.3.](#section-2.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Iterations](#name-iterations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iterations}

NSEC3 records are created by first hashing the input domain and then
repeating that hashing using the same algorithm a number of times based
on the iteration parameter in the NSEC3PARAM and NSEC3 records. The
first hash with NSEC3 is typically sufficient to discourage zone
enumeration performed by \"zone walking\" an unhashed NSEC
chain.[¶](#section-2.3-1){.pilcrow}

Note that \[[RFC5155](#RFC5155){.xref}\] describes the Iterations field
as follows[¶](#section-2.3-2){.pilcrow}

> The Iterations field defines the number of additional times the hash
> function has been performed.[¶](#section-2.3-3){.pilcrow}

This means that an NSEC3 record with an Iterations field of 0 actually
requires one hash iteration.[¶](#section-2.3-4){.pilcrow}

Only determined parties with significant resources are likely to try and
uncover hashed values, regardless of the number of additional iterations
performed. If an adversary really wants to expend significant CPU
resources to mount an offline dictionary attack on a zone\'s NSEC3
chain, they\'ll likely be able to find most of the \"guessable\" names
despite any level of additional hashing
iterations.[¶](#section-2.3-5){.pilcrow}

Most names published in the DNS are rarely secret or unpredictable. They
are published to be memorable, used and consumed by humans. They are
often recorded in many other network logs such as email logs,
certificate transparency logs, web page links, intrusion-detection
systems, malware scanners, email archives, etc. Many times a simple
dictionary of commonly used domain names prefixes (www, mail, imap,
login, database, etc.) can be used to quickly reveal a large number of
labels within a zone. Because of this, there are increasing performance
costs yet diminishing returns associated with applying additional hash
iterations beyond the first.[¶](#section-2.3-6){.pilcrow}

Although [Section
10.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5155#section-10.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC5155](#RFC5155){.xref}\] specifies the upper bounds for the number
of hash iterations to use, there is no published guidance for zone
owners about good values to select. Recent academic studies have shown
that NSEC3 hashing provides only moderate protection
\[[GPUNSEC3](#GPUNSEC3){.xref}\]
\[[ZONEENUM](#ZONEENUM){.xref}\].[¶](#section-2.3-7){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#salt}
::: {#section-2.4 .section}
### [2.4.](#section-2.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Salt](#name-salt){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-salt}

NSEC3 records provide an additional salt value, which can be combined
with a Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) to influence the resulting
hash, but properties of this extra salt are
complicated.[¶](#section-2.4-1){.pilcrow}

In cryptography, salts generally add a layer of protection against
offline, stored dictionary attacks by combining the value to be hashed
with a unique \"salt\" value. This prevents adversaries from building up
and remembering a single dictionary of values that can translate a hash
output back to the value that it was derived
from.[¶](#section-2.4-2){.pilcrow}

In the case of DNS, the situation is different because the hashed names
placed in NSEC3 records are always implicitly \"salted\" by hashing the
FQDN from each zone. Thus, no single pre-computed table works to speed
up dictionary attacks against multiple target zones. An attacker is
always required to compute a complete dictionary per zone, which is
expensive in both storage and CPU time.[¶](#section-2.4-3){.pilcrow}

To understand the role of the additional NSEC3 salt field, we have to
consider how a typical zone walking attack works. Typically, the attack
has two phases: online and offline. In the online phase, an attacker
\"walks the zone\" by enumerating (almost) all hashes listed in NSEC3
records and storing them for the offline phase. Then, in the offline
cracking phase, the attacker attempts to crack the underlying hash. In
this phase, the additional salt value raises the cost of the attack only
if the salt value changes during the online phase of the attack. In
other words, an additional, constant salt value does not change the cost
of the attack.[¶](#section-2.4-4){.pilcrow}

Changing a zone\'s salt value requires the construction of a complete
new NSEC3 chain. This is true both when re-signing the entire zone at
once and when incrementally signing it in the background where the new
salt is only activated once every name in the chain has been completed.
As a result, re-salting is a very complex operation, with significant
CPU time, memory, and bandwidth consumption. This makes very frequent
re-salting impractical and renders the additional salt field
functionally useless.[¶](#section-2.4-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#recommendations-for-deploying-and-validating-nsec3-records}
::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Recommendations for Deploying and Validating NSEC3 Records](#name-recommendations-for-deployi){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-recommendations-for-deployi}

The following subsections describe recommendations for the different
operating realms within the DNS.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

::: {#best-practice-for-zone-publishers}
::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Best Practice for Zone Publishers](#name-best-practice-for-zone-publ){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-best-practice-for-zone-publ}

First, if the operational or security features of NSEC3 are not needed,
then NSEC [SHOULD]{.bcp14} be used in preference to NSEC3. NSEC3
requires greater computational power (see [Appendix
B](#computationalburdens){.xref}) for both authoritative servers and
validating clients. Specifically, there is a nontrivial complexity in
finding matching NSEC3 records to randomly generated prefixes within a
DNS zone. NSEC mitigates this concern. If NSEC3 must be used, then an
iterations count of 0 [MUST]{.bcp14} be used to alleviate computational
burdens. Note that extra iteration counts other than 0 increase the
impact of CPU-exhausting DoS attacks, and also increase the risk of
interoperability problems.[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

Note that deploying NSEC with minimally covering NSEC records
\[[RFC4470](#RFC4470){.xref}\] also incurs a cost, and zone owners
should measure the computational difference in deploying either
\[[RFC4470](#RFC4470){.xref}\] or NSEC3.[¶](#section-3.1-2){.pilcrow}

In short, for all zones, the recommended NSEC3 parameters are as shown
below:[¶](#section-3.1-3){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-3.1-4 .alignLeft .art-text .artwork}
    ; SHA-1, no extra iterations, empty salt:
    ;
    bcp.example. IN NSEC3PARAM 1 0 0 -

[¶](#section-3.1-4){.pilcrow}
:::

For small zones, the use of opt-out-based NSEC3 records is [NOT
RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}.[¶](#section-3.1-5){.pilcrow}

For very large and sparsely signed zones, where the majority of the
records are insecure delegations, opt-out [MAY]{.bcp14} be
used.[¶](#section-3.1-6){.pilcrow}

Operators [SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14} use a salt by indicating a zero-length
salt value instead (represented as a \"-\" in the presentation
format).[¶](#section-3.1-7){.pilcrow}

If salts are used, note that since the NSEC3PARAM RR is not used by
validating resolvers (see [Section
4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5155#section-4){.relref} of
\[[RFC5155](#RFC5155){.xref}\]), the iterations and salt parameters can
be changed without the need to wait for RRsets to expire from caches. A
complete new NSEC3 chain needs to be constructed and the full zone needs
to be re-signed.[¶](#section-3.1-8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#recommendation-for-validating-resolvers}
::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Recommendation for Validating Resolvers](#name-recommendation-for-validati){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-recommendation-for-validati}

Because there has been a large growth of open (public) DNSSEC validating
resolvers that are subject to compute resource constraints when handling
requests from anonymous clients, this document recommends that
validating resolvers reduce their iteration count limits over time.
Specifically, validating resolver operators and validating resolver
software implementers are encouraged to continue evaluating NSEC3
iteration count deployment trends and lower their acceptable iteration
limits over time. Because treating a high iterations count as insecure
leaves zones subject to attack, validating resolver operators and
validating resolver software implementers are further encouraged to
lower their default limit for returning SERVFAIL when processing NSEC3
parameters containing large iteration count values. See [Appendix
A](#deploymentmeasurements){.xref} for measurements taken near the time
of publication of this document and potential starting
points.[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

Validating resolvers [MAY]{.bcp14} return an insecure response to their
clients when processing NSEC3 records with iterations larger than 0.
Note also that a validating resolver returning an insecure response
[MUST]{.bcp14} still validate the signature over the NSEC3 record to
ensure the iteration count was not altered since record publication (see
[Section
10.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5155#section-10.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC5155](#RFC5155){.xref}\]).[¶](#section-3.2-2){.pilcrow}

Validating resolvers [MAY]{.bcp14} also return a SERVFAIL response when
processing NSEC3 records with iterations larger than 0. Validating
resolvers [MAY]{.bcp14} choose to ignore authoritative server responses
with iteration counts greater than 0, which will likely result in
returning a SERVFAIL to the client when no acceptable responses are
received from authoritative servers.[¶](#section-3.2-3){.pilcrow}

Validating resolvers returning an insecure or SERVFAIL answer to their
client after receiving and validating an unsupported NSEC3 parameter
from the authoritative server(s) [SHOULD]{.bcp14} return an Extended DNS
Error (EDE) \[[RFC8914](#RFC8914){.xref}\] EDNS0 option of value 27.
Validating resolvers that choose to ignore a response with an
unsupported iteration count (and that do not validate the signature)
[MUST NOT]{.bcp14} return this EDE option.[¶](#section-3.2-4){.pilcrow}

Note that this specification updates \[[RFC5155](#RFC5155){.xref}\] by
significantly decreasing the requirements originally specified in
[Section
10.3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5155#section-10.3){.relref} of
\[[RFC5155](#RFC5155){.xref}\]. See the Security Considerations
([Section 4](#security-considerations){.xref}) for arguments on how to
handle responses with non-zero iteration
count.[¶](#section-3.2-5){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#recommendation-for-primary-secondary-relationships}
::: {#section-3.3 .section}
### [3.3.](#section-3.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Recommendation for Primary and Secondary Relationships](#name-recommendation-for-primary-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-recommendation-for-primary-}

Primary and secondary authoritative servers for a zone that are not
being run by the same operational staff and/or using the same software
and configuration must take into account the potential differences in
NSEC3 iteration support.[¶](#section-3.3-1){.pilcrow}

Operators of secondary services should advertise the parameter limits
that their servers support. Correspondingly, operators of primary
servers need to ensure that their secondaries support the NSEC3
parameters they expect to use in their zones. To ensure reliability,
after primaries change their iteration counts, they should query their
secondaries with known nonexistent labels to verify the secondary
servers are responding as expected.[¶](#section-3.3-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {#security-considerations}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

This entire document discusses security considerations with various
parameter selections of NSEC3 and NSEC3PARAM
fields.[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

The point where a validating resolver returns insecure versus the point
where it returns SERVFAIL must be considered carefully. Specifically,
when a validating resolver treats a zone as insecure above a particular
value (say 100) and returns SERVFAIL above a higher point (say 500), it
leaves the zone subject to attacker-in-the-middle attacks as if it were
unsigned between these values. Thus, validating resolver operators and
software implementers [SHOULD]{.bcp14} set the point above which a zone
is treated as insecure for certain values of NSEC3 iterations to the
same as the point where a validating resolver begins returning
SERVFAIL.[¶](#section-4-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#operational-considerations}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [Operational Considerations](#name-operational-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-operational-considerations}

This entire document discusses operational considerations with various
parameter selections of NSEC3 and NSEC3PARAM
fields.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#iana-considerations}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

IANA has allocated the following code in the First Come First Served
range \[[RFC8126](#RFC8126){.xref}\] of the \"Extended DNS Error Codes\"
registry within the \"Domain Name System (DNS) Parameters\"
registry:[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

INFO-CODE:
:   27[¶](#section-6-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Purpose:
:   Unsupported NSEC3 iterations value[¶](#section-6-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Reference:
:   RFC 9276[¶](#section-6-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC4035\]
:   [Arends, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Austein, R.]{.refAuthor},
    [Larson, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Massey, D.]{.refAuthor}, and [S.
    Rose]{.refAuthor}, [\"Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security
    Extensions\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 4035]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC4035]{.seriesInfo}, March 2005,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4035>\>.
:   

\[RFC4470\]
:   [Weiler, S.]{.refAuthor} and [J. Ihren]{.refAuthor}, [\"Minimally
    Covering NSEC Records and DNSSEC On-line Signing\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    4470]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC4470]{.seriesInfo}, April 2006,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4470>\>.
:   

\[RFC5155\]
:   [Laurie, B.]{.refAuthor}, [Sisson, G.]{.refAuthor},
    [Arends, R.]{.refAuthor}, and [D. Blacka]{.refAuthor}, [\"DNS
    Security (DNSSEC) Hashed Authenticated Denial of
    Existence\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5155]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5155]{.seriesInfo}, March 2008,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5155>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   

\[RFC8914\]
:   [Kumari, W.]{.refAuthor}, [Hunt, E.]{.refAuthor},
    [Arends, R.]{.refAuthor}, [Hardaker, W.]{.refAuthor}, and [D.
    Lawrence]{.refAuthor}, [\"Extended DNS Errors\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    8914]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8914]{.seriesInfo}, October
    2020, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8914>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-7.2 .section}
### [7.2.](#section-7.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[GPUNSEC3\]
:   [Wander, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Schwittmann, L.]{.refAuthor},
    [Boelmann, C.]{.refAuthor}, and [T. Weis]{.refAuthor}, [\"GPU-Based
    NSEC3 Hash Breaking\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI
    10.1109/NCA.2014.27]{.seriesInfo}, August 2014,
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1109/NCA.2014.27>\>.
:   

\[RFC8126\]
:   [Cotton, M.]{.refAuthor}, [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, and [T.
    Narten]{.refAuthor}, [\"Guidelines for Writing an IANA
    Considerations Section in RFCs\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 26]{.seriesInfo},
    [RFC 8126]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8126]{.seriesInfo}, June
    2017, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8126>\>.
:   

\[RFC8624\]
:   [Wouters, P.]{.refAuthor} and [O. Sury]{.refAuthor}, [\"Algorithm
    Implementation Requirements and Usage Guidance for
    DNSSEC\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 8624]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8624]{.seriesInfo}, June 2019,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8624>\>.
:   

\[ZONEENUM\]
:   [Wang, Z.]{.refAuthor}, [Xiao, L.]{.refAuthor}, and [R.
    Wang]{.refAuthor}, [\"An efficient DNSSEC zone enumeration
    algorithm\"]{.refTitle}, [DOI 10.2495/MIIT130591]{.seriesInfo},
    April 2014, \<<https://doi.org/10.2495/MIIT130591>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#deploymentmeasurements}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Appendix A.](#appendix-A){.section-number .selfRef} [Deployment Measurements at Time of Publication](#name-deployment-measurements-at-){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-deployment-measurements-at-}

At the time of publication, setting an upper limit of 100 iterations for
treating a zone as insecure is interoperable without significant
problems, but at the same time still enables CPU-exhausting DoS
attacks.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}

At the time of publication, returning SERVFAIL beyond 500 iterations
appears to be interoperable without significant
problems.[¶](#appendix-A-2){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#computationalburdens}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Appendix B.](#appendix-B){.section-number .selfRef} [Computational Burdens of Processing NSEC3 Iterations](#name-computational-burdens-of-pr){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-computational-burdens-of-pr}

The queries per second (QPS) of authoritative servers will decrease due
to computational overhead when processing DNS requests for zones
containing higher NSEC3 iteration counts. The table below shows the drop
in QPS for various iteration counts.[¶](#appendix-B-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-drop-in-qps-for-various-ite}

::: {#iteration-counts-table}
  Iterations   QPS \[% of 0 Iterations QPS\]
  ------------ -------------------------------
  0            100%
  10           89%
  20           82%
  50           64%
  100          47%
  150          38%

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [Drop in QPS for Various Iteration
  Counts](#name-drop-in-qps-for-various-ite){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#qps}
::: {#appendix-C .section}
## [Acknowledgments](#name-acknowledgments){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgments}

The authors would like to thank the participants in the dns-operations
discussion, which took place on mattermost hosted by
DNS-OARC.[¶](#appendix-C-1){.pilcrow}

Additionally, the following people contributed text or review comments
to this document:[¶](#appendix-C-2){.pilcrow}

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.1}
    [Vladimir Cunat]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.1.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.2}
    [Tony Finch]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.2.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.3}
    [Paul Hoffman]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.3.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.4}
    [Warren Kumari]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.4.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.5}
    [Alexander Mayrhofer]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.5.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.6}
    [Matthijs Mekking]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.6.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.7}
    [Florian Obser]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.7.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.8}
    [Petr Spacek]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.8.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.9}
    [Paul Vixie]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.9.1){.pilcrow}
    :::

-   ::: {#appendix-C-3.10}
    [Tim Wicinski]{.contact-name}[¶](#appendix-C-3.10.1){.pilcrow}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-D .section}
## [Authors\' Addresses](#name-authors-addresses){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-addresses}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Wes Hardaker]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[USC/ISI]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <ietf@hardakers.net>
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Viktor Dukhovni]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Bloomberg, L.P.]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <ietf-dane@dukhovni.org>
:::
:::
:::
