  RFC 9327   NTP Control Messages   November 2022
  ---------- ---------------------- ---------------
  Haberman   Historic               \[Page\]

::: {#external-metadata .document-information}
:::

::: {#internal-metadata .document-information}

Stream:
:   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

RFC:
:   [9327](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9327){.eref}

Category:
:   Historic

Published:
:   November 2022

ISSN:
:   2070-1721

Author:

:   ::: author
    ::: author-name
    B. Haberman, [Ed.]{.editor}
    :::

    ::: org
    JHU
    :::
    :::
:::

# RFC 9327 {#rfcnum}

# Control Messages Protocol for Use with Network Time Protocol Version 4 {#title}

::: {#section-abstract .section}
## [Abstract](#abstract){.selfRef}

This document describes the structure of the control messages that were
historically used with the Network Time Protocol (NTP) before the advent
of more modern control and management approaches. These control messages
have been used to monitor and control the NTP application running on any
IP network attached computer. The information in this document was
originally described in Appendix B of RFC 1305. The goal of this
document is to provide an updated description of the control messages
described in RFC 1305 in order to conform with the updated NTP
specification documented in RFC 5905.[¶](#section-abstract-1){.pilcrow}

The publication of this document is not meant to encourage the
development and deployment of these control messages. This document is
only providing a current reference for these control messages given the
current status of RFC 1305.[¶](#section-abstract-2){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#status-of-memo}
::: {#section-boilerplate.1 .section}
## [Status of This Memo](#name-status-of-this-memo){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-of-this-memo}

This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
published for the historical
record.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-1){.pilcrow}

This document defines a Historic Document for the Internet community.
This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF community. It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Not all documents approved
by the IESG are candidates for any level of Internet Standard; see
Section 2 of RFC 7841.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-2){.pilcrow}

Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and
how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9327>.[¶](#section-boilerplate.1-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#copyright}
::: {#section-boilerplate.2 .section}
## [Copyright Notice](#name-copyright-notice){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-copyright-notice}

Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-1){.pilcrow}

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust\'s Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(<https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info>) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal
Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the Revised
BSD License.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-2){.pilcrow}

This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
Contributions published or made publicly available before November 10,
2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this material
may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow modifications of
such material outside the IETF Standards Process. Without obtaining an
adequate license from the person(s) controlling the copyright in such
materials, this document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards
Process, and derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF
Standards Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
translate it into languages other than
English.[¶](#section-boilerplate.2-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#toc}
::: {#section-toc.1 .section}
[▲](#){.toplink}

## [Table of Contents](#name-table-of-contents){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-table-of-contents}

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1}
    [1](#section-1){.auto .internal
    .xref}.  [Introduction](#name-introduction){.internal .xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.1}
        [1.1](#section-1.1){.auto .internal
        .xref}.  [Terminology](#name-terminology){.internal .xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.2}
        [1.2](#section-1.2){.auto .internal .xref}.  [Control Message
        Overview](#name-control-message-overview){.internal .xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.1.2.3}
        [1.3](#section-1.3){.auto .internal .xref}.  [Remote Facility
        Message Overview](#name-remote-facility-message-ove){.internal
        .xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.2}
    [2](#section-2){.auto .internal .xref}.  [NTP Control Message
    Format](#name-ntp-control-message-format){.internal .xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3}
    [3](#section-3){.auto .internal .xref}.  [Status
    Words](#name-status-words){.internal .xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.1}
        [3.1](#section-3.1){.auto .internal .xref}.  [System Status
        Word](#name-system-status-word){.internal .xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.2}
        [3.2](#section-3.2){.auto .internal .xref}.  [Peer Status
        Word](#name-peer-status-word){.internal .xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.3}
        [3.3](#section-3.3){.auto .internal .xref}.  [Clock Status
        Word](#name-clock-status-word){.internal .xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.3.2.4}
        [3.4](#section-3.4){.auto .internal .xref}.  [Error Status
        Word](#name-error-status-word){.internal .xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.4}
    [4](#section-4){.auto .internal
    .xref}.  [Commands](#name-commands){.internal .xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.5}
    [5](#section-5){.auto .internal .xref}.  [IANA
    Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.internal .xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.6}
    [6](#section-6){.auto .internal .xref}.  [Security
    Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.internal .xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7}
    [7](#section-7){.auto .internal
    .xref}.  [References](#name-references){.internal .xref}

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.1}
        [7.1](#section-7.1){.auto .internal .xref}.  [Normative
        References](#name-normative-references){.internal .xref}
        :::

    -   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.7.2.2}
        [7.2](#section-7.2){.auto .internal .xref}.  [Informative
        References](#name-informative-references){.internal .xref}
        :::
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.8}
    [Appendix A](#appendix-A){.auto .internal .xref}.  [NTP Remote
    Facility Message
    Format](#name-ntp-remote-facility-message){.internal .xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.9}
    [](#appendix-B){.auto .internal
    .xref}[Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.internal .xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.10}
    [](#appendix-C){.auto .internal
    .xref}[Contributors](#name-contributors){.internal .xref}
    :::

-   ::: {#section-toc.1-1.11}
    [](#appendix-D){.auto .internal .xref}[Author\'s
    Address](#name-authors-address){.internal .xref}
    :::
:::
:::

::: {#section-1 .section}
## [1.](#section-1){.section-number .selfRef} [Introduction](#name-introduction){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-introduction}

\[[RFC1305](#RFC1305){.cite .xref}\] describes a set of control messages
for use within the Network Time Protocol (NTP) when a comprehensive
network management solution was not available. The definitions of these
control messages were not promulgated to \[[RFC5905](#RFC5905){.cite
.xref}\] when NTP version 4 was documented. These messages were intended
for use only in systems where no other management facilities were
available or appropriate, such as in dedicated-function bus peripherals.
Support for these messages is not required in order to conform to
\[[RFC5905](#RFC5905){.cite .xref}\]. The control messages are described
here as a current reference for use with an implementation of NTP from
RFC 5905.[¶](#section-1-1){.pilcrow}

The publication of this document is not meant to encourage the
development and deployment of these control messages. This document is
only providing a current reference for these control messages given the
current status of RFC 1305.[¶](#section-1-2){.pilcrow}

::: {#section-1.1 .section}
### [1.1.](#section-1.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Terminology](#name-terminology){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-terminology}

The key words \"[MUST]{.bcp14}\", \"[MUST NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[REQUIRED]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHALL NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[SHOULD]{.bcp14}\", \"[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14}\",
\"[RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\", \"[NOT RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}\",
\"[MAY]{.bcp14}\", and \"[OPTIONAL]{.bcp14}\" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 \[[RFC2119](#RFC2119){.cite .xref}\]
\[[RFC8174](#RFC8174){.cite .xref}\] when, and only when, they appear in
all capitals, as shown here.[¶](#section-1.1-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-1.2 .section}
### [1.2.](#section-1.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Control Message Overview](#name-control-message-overview){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-control-message-overview}

The NTP mode 6 control messages are used by NTP management programs
(e.g., ntpq) when a more robust network management facility (e.g., SNMP)
is not available. These control messages provide rudimentary control and
monitoring functions to manage a running instance of an NTP server.
These commands are not designed to be used for communication between
instances of running NTP servers.[¶](#section-1.2-1){.pilcrow}

The NTP control message has the value 6 specified in the mode field of
the first octet of the NTP header and is formatted as shown in [Figure
1](#M6Hdr){.auto .internal .xref}. The format of the data field is
specific to each command or response; however, in most cases, the format
is designed to be constructed and viewed by humans and so is coded in
free-form ASCII. This facilitates the specification and implementation
of simple management tools in the absence of fully evolved
network-management facilities. As in ordinary NTP messages, the
authenticator field follows the data field. If the authenticator is
used, the data field is zero-padded to a 32-bit boundary, but the
padding bits are not considered part of the data field and are not
included in the field count.[¶](#section-1.2-2){.pilcrow}

IP hosts are not required to reassemble datagrams over a certain size
(576 octets for IPv4 \[[RFC0791](#RFC0791){.cite .xref}\] and 1280
octets for IPv6 \[[RFC8200](#RFC8200){.cite .xref}\]); however, some
commands or responses may involve more data than will fit into a single
datagram. Accordingly, a simple reassembly feature is included in which
each octet of the message data is numbered starting with zero. As each
fragment is transmitted, the number of its first octet is inserted in
the offset field and the number of octets is inserted in the count
field. The more-data (M) bit is set in all fragments except the
last.[¶](#section-1.2-3){.pilcrow}

Most control functions involve sending a command and receiving a
response, perhaps involving several fragments. The sender chooses a
distinct, nonzero sequence number and sets the status field, \"R\" bit,
and \"E\" bit to zero. The responder interprets the opcode and
additional information in the data field, updates the status field, sets
the \"R\" bit to one and returns the three 32-bit words of the header
along with additional information in the data field. In the case of
invalid message format or contents, the responder inserts a code in the
status field, sets the \"R\" and \"E\" bits to one and, optionally,
inserts a diagnostic message in the data
field.[¶](#section-1.2-4){.pilcrow}

Some commands read or write system variables (e.g., s.offset) and peer
variables (e.g., p.stratum) for an association identified in the
command. Others read or write variables associated with a radio clock or
other device directly connected to a source of primary synchronization
information. To identify which type of variable and association, the
Association ID is used. System variables are indicated by the identifier
zero. As each association is mobilized a unique, nonzero identifier is
created for it. These identifiers are used in a cyclic fashion, so that
the chance of using an old identifier that matches a newly created
association is remote. A management entity can request a list of current
identifiers and subsequently use them to read and write variables for
each association. An attempt to use an expired identifier results in an
exception response, following which the list can be requested
again.[¶](#section-1.2-5){.pilcrow}

Some exception events, such as when a peer becomes reachable or
unreachable, occur spontaneously and are not necessarily associated with
a command. An implementation may elect to save the event information for
later retrieval, to send an asynchronous response (called a trap), or
both. In case of a trap, the IP address and port number are determined
by a previous command and the sequence field is set as described below.
Current status and summary information for the latest exception event is
returned in all normal responses. Bits in the status field indicate
whether an exception has occurred since the last response and whether
more than one exception has occurred.[¶](#section-1.2-6){.pilcrow}

Commands need not necessarily be sent by an NTP peer, so ordinary
access-control procedures may not apply; however, the optional
mask/match mechanism suggested in [Section 6](#Security){.auto .internal
.xref} provides the capability to control access by mode number, so this
could be used to limit access for control messages (mode 6) to selected
address ranges.[¶](#section-1.2-7){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#section-1.3 .section}
### [1.3.](#section-1.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Remote Facility Message Overview](#name-remote-facility-message-ove){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-remote-facility-message-ove}

The original development of the NTP daemon included a Remote Facility
for monitoring and configuration. This facility used mode 7 commands to
communicate with the NTP daemon. This document illustrates the mode 7
packet format only. The commands embedded in the mode 7 messages are
implementation specific and not standardized in any way. The mode 7
message format is described in [Appendix A](#mode7){.auto .internal
.xref}.[¶](#section-1.3-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-2 .section}
## [2.](#section-2){.section-number .selfRef} [NTP Control Message Format](#name-ntp-control-message-format){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ntp-control-message-format}

The format of the NTP Control Message header, which immediately follows
the UDP header, is shown in [Figure 1](#M6Hdr){.auto .internal .xref}.
Following the figure is a description of its header
fields.[¶](#section-2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-ntp-control-message-header}

::: {#M6Hdr}
::: {#section-2-2.1 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |LI |  VN |Mode |R|E|M| opcode  |       Sequence Number         |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |            Status             |       Association ID          |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |            Offset             |            Count              |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                                                               |
    /                    Data (up to 468 bytes)                     /
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                    Padding (optional)                         |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                                                               |
    /              Authenticator (optional, 20 or 24 bits)          /
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
:::

[Figure 1](#figure-1){.selfRef}: [NTP Control Message
Header](#name-ntp-control-message-header){.selfRef}
:::

[]{.break}

Leap Indicator (LI):
:   This is a 2-bit integer that is set to b00 for control message
    requests and responses. The Leap Indicator value used at this
    position in most NTP modes is in the system status word provided in
    some control message responses.[¶](#section-2-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Version Number (VN):
:   This is a 3-bit integer indicating a minimum NTP version number. NTP
    servers do not respond to control messages with an unrecognized
    version number. Requests may intentionally use a lower version
    number to enable interoperability with earlier versions of NTP.
    Responses carry the same version as the corresponding
    request.[¶](#section-2-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Mode:
:   This is a 3-bit integer indicating the mode. The value 6 indicates
    an NTP control message.[¶](#section-2-3.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Response Bit (R):
:   Set to zero for commands; set to one for
    responses.[¶](#section-2-3.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Error Bit (E):
:   Set to zero for normal responses; set to one for an error
    response.[¶](#section-2-3.10){.pilcrow}
:   

More Bit (M):
:   Set to zero for the last fragment; set to one for all
    others.[¶](#section-2-3.12){.pilcrow}
:   

Operation Code (opcode):
:   This is a 5-bit integer specifying the command function. Values
    currently defined include the
    following:[¶](#section-2-3.14){.pilcrow}
:   

[]{#name-operation-codes}

::: {#opcodes}
  Code    Meaning
  ------- ------------------------------------------------
  0       reserved
  1       read status command/response
  2       read variables command/response
  3       write variables command/response
  4       read clock variables command/response
  5       write clock variables command/response
  6       set trap address/port command/response
  7       trap response
  8       runtime configuration command/response
  9       export configuration to file command/response
  10      retrieve remote address stats command/response
  11      retrieve ordered list command/response
  12      request client-specific nonce command/response
  13-30   reserved
  31      unset trap address/port command/response

  : [Table 1](#table-1){.selfRef}: [Operation
  Codes](#name-operation-codes){.selfRef}
:::

[]{.break}

Sequence Number:
:   This is a 16-bit integer indicating the sequence number of the
    command or response. Each request uses a different sequence number.
    Each response carries the same sequence number as its corresponding
    request. For asynchronous trap responses, the responder increments
    the sequence number by one for each response, allowing trap
    receivers to detect missing trap responses. The sequence number of
    each fragment of a multiple-datagram response carries the same
    sequence number, copied from the
    request.[¶](#section-2-5.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Status:
:   This is a 16-bit code indicating the current status of the system,
    peer, or clock with values coded as described in following
    sections.[¶](#section-2-5.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Association ID:
:   This is a 16-bit unsigned integer identifying a valid association or
    zero for the system clock.[¶](#section-2-5.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Offset:
:   This is a 16-bit unsigned integer indicating the offset, in octets,
    of the first octet in the data area. The offset is set to zero in
    requests. Responses spanning multiple datagrams use a positive
    offset in all but the first datagram.[¶](#section-2-5.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Count:
:   This is a 16-bit unsigned integer indicating the length of the data
    field, in octets.[¶](#section-2-5.10){.pilcrow}
:   

Data:
:   This contains the message data for the command or response. The
    maximum number of data octets is 468.[¶](#section-2-5.12){.pilcrow}
:   

Padding (optional):
:   Contains zero to 3 octets with a value of zero, as needed to ensure
    the overall control message size is a multiple of 4
    octets.[¶](#section-2-5.14){.pilcrow}
:   

Authenticator (optional):
:   When the NTP authentication mechanism is implemented, this contains
    the authenticator information defined in [Appendix
    C](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1305#appendix-C){.relref} of
    \[[RFC1305](#RFC1305){.cite .xref}\].[¶](#section-2-5.16){.pilcrow}
:   
:::

::: {#section-3 .section}
## [3.](#section-3){.section-number .selfRef} [Status Words](#name-status-words){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-status-words}

Status words indicate the present status of the system, associations,
and clock. They are designed to be interpreted by network-monitoring
programs and are in one of four 16-bit formats shown in [Figure
2](#M6SW){.auto .internal .xref} and described in this section. System
and peer status words are associated with responses for all commands
except the read clock variables, write clock variables, and set trap
address/port commands. The association identifier zero specifies the
system status word, while a nonzero identifier specifies a particular
peer association. The status word returned in response to read clock
variables and write clock variables commands indicates the state of the
clock hardware and decoding software. A special error status word is
used to report malformed command fields or invalid
values.[¶](#section-3-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-status-word-formats}

::: {#M6SW}
::: {#section-3-2.1 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
     0                   1
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | LI| Clock Src | Count | Code  |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
           System Status Word

    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |  Status | SEL | Count | Code  |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
            Peer Status Word

    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Clock Status  |    Code       |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
            Radio Status Word

    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |   Error Code  |   Reserved    |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
            Error Status Word

    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |   Reserved    | Count | Code  |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
            Clock Status Word
:::

[Figure 2](#figure-2){.selfRef}: [Status Word
Formats](#name-status-word-formats){.selfRef}
:::

::: {#section-3.1 .section}
### [3.1.](#section-3.1){.section-number .selfRef} [System Status Word](#name-system-status-word){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-system-status-word}

The system status word appears in the status field of the response to a
read status or read variables command with a zero association
identifier. The format of the system status word is as
follows:[¶](#section-3.1-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Leap Indicator (LI):
:   This is a 2-bit code warning of an impending leap second to be
    inserted/deleted in the last minute of the current day, with bit 0
    and bit 1, respectively, coded as
    follows:[¶](#section-3.1-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

[]{#name-leap-indicator-codes}

::: {#LeapIndicator}
  LI   Meaning
  ---- -------------------------------------------------
  00   no warning
  01   insert second after 23:59:59 of the current day
  10   delete second 23:59:59 of the current day
  11   unsynchronized

  : [Table 2](#table-2){.selfRef}: [Leap Indicator
  Codes](#name-leap-indicator-codes){.selfRef}
:::

[]{.break}

Clock Source (Clock Src):
:   This is a 6-bit integer indicating the current synchronization
    source, with values coded as follows:[¶](#section-3.1-4.2){.pilcrow}
:   

[]{#name-clock-source-values}

::: {#ClockSource}
  Code    Meaning
  ------- --------------------------------------------------------
  0       unspecified or unknown
  1       Calibrated atomic clock (e.g., PPS, HP 5061)
  2       VLF (band 4) or LF (band 5) radio (e.g., OMEGA,, WWVB)
  3       HF (band 7) radio (e.g., CHU, MSF, WWV/H)
  4       UHF (band 9) satellite (e.g., GOES, GPS)
  5       local net (e.g., DCN, TSP, DTS)
  6       UDP/NTP
  7       UDP/TIME
  8       eyeball-and-wristwatch
  9       telephone modem (e.g., NIST)
  10-63   reserved

  : [Table 3](#table-3){.selfRef}: [Clock Source
  Values](#name-clock-source-values){.selfRef}
:::

[]{.break}

System Event Counter (Count):
:   This is a 4-bit integer indicating the number of system events
    occurring since the last time the System Event Code changed. Upon
    reaching 15, subsequent events with the same code are not
    counted.[¶](#section-3.1-6.2){.pilcrow}
:   

System Event Code (Code):
:   This is a 4-bit integer identifying the latest system exception
    event, with new values overwriting previous values, and coded as
    follows:[¶](#section-3.1-6.4){.pilcrow}
:   

[]{#name-system-event-codes}

::: {#SystemEventCode}
  Code   Meaning
  ------ ------------------------------------------------------------
  0      unspecified
  1      frequency correction (drift) file not available
  2      frequency correction started (frequency stepped)
  3      spike detected and ignored, starting stepout timer
  4      frequency training started
  5      clock synchronized
  6      system restart
  7      panic stop (required step greater than panic threshold)
  8      no system peer
  9      leap second insertion/deletion armed for the current month
  10     leap second disarmed
  11     leap second inserted or deleted
  12     clock stepped (stepout timer expired)
  13     kernel loop discipline status changed
  14     leapseconds table loaded from file
  15     leapseconds table outdated, updated file needed

  : [Table 4](#table-4){.selfRef}: [System Event
  Codes](#name-system-event-codes){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#section-3.2 .section}
### [3.2.](#section-3.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Peer Status Word](#name-peer-status-word){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-peer-status-word}

A peer status word is returned in the status field of a response to a
read status, read variables, or write variables command and appears in
the list of Association IDs and status words returned by a read status
command with a zero Association ID. The format of a peer status word is
as follows:[¶](#section-3.2-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Peer Status (Status):
:   This is a 5-bit code indicating the status of the peer determined by
    the packet procedure, with bits assigned as
    follows:[¶](#section-3.2-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

[]{#name-peer-status-bits}

::: {#PeerStatus}
  Peer Status bit   Meaning
  ----------------- ------------------------------------------
  0                 configured (peer.config)
  1                 authentication enabled (peer.authenable)
  2                 authentication okay (peer.authentic)
  3                 reachability okay (peer.reach != 0)
  4                 broadcast association

  : [Table 5](#table-5){.selfRef}: [Peer Status
  Bits](#name-peer-status-bits){.selfRef}
:::

[]{.break}

Peer Selection (SEL):
:   This is a 3-bit integer indicating the status of the peer determined
    by the clock-selection procedure, with values coded as
    follows:[¶](#section-3.2-4.2){.pilcrow}
:   

[]{#name-peer-selection-values}

::: {#PeerSelection}
  Sel   Meaning
  ----- -------------------------------------------------------
  0     rejected
  1     discarded by intersection algorithm
  2     discarded by table overflow (not currently used)
  3     discarded by the cluster algorithm
  4     included by the combine algorithm
  5     backup source (with more than sys.maxclock survivors)
  6     system peer (synchronization source)
  7     PPS (pulse per second) peer

  : [Table 6](#table-6){.selfRef}: [Peer Selection
  Values](#name-peer-selection-values){.selfRef}
:::

[]{.break}

Peer Event Counter (Count):
:   This is a 4-bit integer indicating the number of peer exception
    events that occurred since the last time the peer event code
    changed. Upon reaching 15, subsequent events with the same code are
    not counted.[¶](#section-3.2-6.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Peer Event Code (Code):
:   This is a 4-bit integer identifying the latest peer exception event,
    with new values overwriting previous values, and coded as
    follows:[¶](#section-3.2-6.4){.pilcrow}
:   

[]{#name-peer-event-code-values}

::: {#PeerEventCode}
  Peer Event Code   Meaning
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------
  0                 unspecified
  1                 association mobilized
  2                 association demobilized
  3                 peer unreachable (peer.reach was nonzero now zero)
  4                 peer reachable (peer.reach was zero now nonzero)
  5                 association restarted or timed out
  6                 no reply (only used with one-shot clock set command)
  7                 peer rate limit exceeded (kiss code RATE received)
  8                 access denied (kiss code DENY received)
  9                 leap second insertion/deletion at month\'s end armed by peer vote
  10                became system peer (sys.peer)
  11                reference clock event (see clock status word)
  12                authentication failed
  13                popcorn spike suppressed by peer clock filter register
  14                entering interleaved mode
  15                recovered from interleave error

  : [Table 7](#table-7){.selfRef}: [Peer Event Code
  Values](#name-peer-event-code-values){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#section-3.3 .section}
### [3.3.](#section-3.3){.section-number .selfRef} [Clock Status Word](#name-clock-status-word){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-clock-status-word}

There are two ways a reference clock can be attached to an NTP service
host: as a dedicated device managed by the operating system and as a
synthetic peer managed by NTP. As in the read status command, the
Association ID is used to identify the correct variable for each clock:
zero for the system clock and nonzero for a peer clock. Only one system
clock is supported by the protocol, although many peer clocks can be
supported. A system or peer clock status word appears in the status
field of the response to a read clock variables or write clock variables
command. This word can be considered to be an extension of the system
status word or the peer status word as appropriate. The format of the
clock status word is as follows:[¶](#section-3.3-1){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Reserved:
:   This is an 8-bit integer that is ignored by requesters and zeroed by
    responders.[¶](#section-3.3-2.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Count:
:   This is a 4-bit integer indicating the number of clock events that
    occurred since the last time the clock event code changed. Upon
    reaching 15, subsequent events with the same code are not
    counted.[¶](#section-3.3-2.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Clock Code (Code):
:   This is a 4-bit integer indicating the current clock status, with
    values coded as follows:[¶](#section-3.3-2.6){.pilcrow}
:   

[]{#name-clock-code-values}

::: {#ClockStatus}
  Clock Status   Meaning
  -------------- ---------------------------------
  0              clock operating within nominals
  1              reply timeout
  2              bad reply format
  3              hardware or software fault
  4              propagation failure
  5              bad date format or value
  6              bad time format or value
  7-15           reserved

  : [Table 8](#table-8){.selfRef}: [Clock Code
  Values](#name-clock-code-values){.selfRef}
:::
:::

::: {#section-3.4 .section}
### [3.4.](#section-3.4){.section-number .selfRef} [Error Status Word](#name-error-status-word){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-error-status-word}

An error status word is returned in the status field of an error
response as the result of invalid message format or contents. Its
presence is indicated when the E (error) bit is set along with the
response (R) bit in the response. It consists of an 8-bit integer coded
as follows:[¶](#section-3.4-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-error-status-word-codes}

::: {#ErrorStatus}
  Error Status   Meaning
  -------------- ----------------------------------
  0              unspecified
  1              authentication failure
  2              invalid message length or format
  3              invalid opcode
  4              unknown Association ID
  5              unknown variable name
  6              invalid variable value
  7              administratively prohibited
  8-255          reserved

  : [Table 9](#table-9){.selfRef}: [Error Status Word
  Codes](#name-error-status-word-codes){.selfRef}
:::
:::
:::

::: {#commands}
::: {#section-4 .section}
## [4.](#section-4){.section-number .selfRef} [Commands](#name-commands){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-commands}

Commands consist of the header and optional data field shown in [Figure
1](#M6Hdr){.auto .internal .xref}. When present, the data field contains
a list of identifiers or assignments in the form
\<\<identifier>\>\[=\<\<value>\>\],\<\<identifier>\>\[=\<\<value>\>\],\...
where \<\<identifier>\> is the ASCII name of a system or peer variable
such as the ones specified in RFC 5905 and \<\<value>\> is expressed as
a decimal, hexadecimal, or string constant in the syntax of the C
programming language. Where no ambiguity exists, the \"sys.\" or
\"peer.\" prefixes can be suppressed. Space characters (ASCII
nonprinting format effectors) can be added to improve readability for
simple monitoring programs that do not reformat the data field.
Representations of note are as follows:[¶](#section-4-1){.pilcrow}

-   [IPv4 internet addresses are written in the form \[n.n.n.n\], where
    n is in decimal notation and the brackets are
    optional[¶](#section-4-2.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.1}
-   [IPv6 internet addresses are formulated based on the guidelines
    defined in \[[RFC5952](#RFC5952){.cite
    .xref}\].[¶](#section-4-2.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.2}
-   [Timestamps (including reference, originate, receive, and transmit
    values) and the logical clock are represented in units of seconds
    and fractions, preferably in hexadecimal
    notation.[¶](#section-4-2.3){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.3}
-   [Delay, offset, dispersion, and distance values are represented in
    units of milliseconds and fractions, preferably in decimal
    notation.[¶](#section-4-2.4){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.4}
-   [All other values are represented as is, preferably in decimal
    notation.[¶](#section-4-2.5){.pilcrow}]{#section-4-2.5}

Implementations may define variables other than those described in RFC
5905; called \"extramural variables\", these are distinguished by the
inclusion of some character type other than alphanumeric or \".\" in the
name. For those commands that return a list of assignments in the
response data field, if the command data field is empty, it is expected
that all available variables defined in RFC 5905 will be included in the
response. For the read commands, if the command data field is nonempty,
an implementation may choose to process this field to individually
select which variables are to be returned.[¶](#section-4-3){.pilcrow}

Commands are interpreted as follows:[¶](#section-4-4){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

Read Status (1):
:   The command data field is empty or contains a list of identifiers
    separated by commas. The command operates in two ways depending on
    the value of the Association ID. If this identifier is nonzero, the
    response includes the peer identifier and status word. Optionally,
    the response data field may contain other information, such as
    described in the Read Variables command. If the association
    identifier is zero, the response includes the system identifier (0)
    and status word; the data field contains a list of binary-coded
    pairs \<\<Association ID>\> \<\<status word>\>, one for each
    currently defined association.[¶](#section-4-5.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Read Variables (2):
:   The command data field is empty or contains a list of identifiers
    separated by commas. If the Association ID is nonzero, the response
    includes the requested peer identifier and status word; the data
    field contains a list of peer variables and values as described
    above. If the Association ID is zero, the data field contains a list
    of system variables. If a peer has been selected as the
    synchronization source, the response includes the peer identifier
    and status word; otherwise, the response includes the system
    identifier (0) and status word.[¶](#section-4-5.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Write Variables (3):
:   The command data field contains a list of assignments as described
    above. The variables are updated as indicated. The response is as
    described for the Read Variables
    command.[¶](#section-4-5.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Read Clock Variables (4):
:   The command data field is empty or contains a list of identifiers
    separated by commas. The Association ID selects the system clock
    variables or peer clock variables in the same way as in the Read
    Variables command. The response includes the requested clock
    identifier and status word; the data field contains a list of clock
    variables and values, including the last timecode message received
    from the clock.[¶](#section-4-5.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Write Clock Variables (5):
:   The command data field contains a list of assignments as described
    above. The clock variables are updated as indicated. The response is
    as described for the read clock variables
    command.[¶](#section-4-5.10){.pilcrow}
:   

Set Trap Address/Port (6):
:   The command Association ID, status, and data fields are ignored. The
    address and port number for subsequent trap messages are taken from
    the source address and port of the control message itself. The
    initial trap counter for trap response messages is taken from the
    sequence field of the command. The response association identifier,
    status, and data fields are not significant. Implementations should
    include logical timeouts that prevent trap transmissions if the
    monitoring program does not renew this information after a lengthy
    interval.[¶](#section-4-5.12){.pilcrow}
:   

Trap Response (7):
:   This message is sent when a system, peer, or clock exception event
    occurs. The opcode field is 7 and the R bit is set. The trap counter
    is incremented by one for each trap sent and the sequence field set
    to that value. The trap message is sent using the IP address and
    port fields established by the set trap address/port command. If a
    system trap, the Association ID field is set to zero and the status
    field contains the system status word. If a peer trap, the
    Association ID field is set to that peer and the status field
    contains the peer status word. Optional ASCII-coded information can
    be included in the data field.[¶](#section-4-5.14){.pilcrow}
:   

Configure (8):
:   The command data is parsed and applied as if supplied in the daemon
    configuration file.[¶](#section-4-5.16){.pilcrow}
:   

Save Configuration (9):
:   Writes a snapshot of the current configuration to the file name
    supplied as the command data. Further, the command is refused unless
    a directory in which to store the resulting files has been
    explicitly configured by the operator.[¶](#section-4-5.18){.pilcrow}
:   

Read Most Recently Used (MRU) list (10):
:   Retrieves records of recently seen remote addresses and associated
    statistics. This command supports all of the state variables defined
    in [Section
    9](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5905#section-9){.relref} of
    \[[RFC5905](#RFC5905){.cite .xref}\]. Command data consists of
    name=value pairs controlling the selection of records, as well as a
    requestor-specific nonce previously retrieved using this command or
    opcode 12 (Request Nonce). The response consists of name=value pairs
    where some names can appear multiple times using a dot followed by a
    zero-based index to distinguish them and to associate elements of
    the same record with the same index. A new nonce is provided with
    each successful response.[¶](#section-4-5.20){.pilcrow}
:   

Read ordered list (11):
:   Retrieves a list ordered by IP address (IPv4 information precedes
    IPv6 information). If the command data is empty or is the seven
    characters \"ifstats\", the associated statistics, status, and
    counters for each local address are returned. If the command data is
    the characters \"addr_restrictions\", then the set of IPv4 remote
    address restrictions followed by the set of IPv6 remote address
    restrictions (access control lists) are returned. Other command data
    returns error code 5 (unknown variable name). Similar to Read MRU,
    response information uses zero-based indexes as part of the variable
    name preceding the equals sign and value, where each index relates
    information for a single address or network. This opcode requires
    authentication.[¶](#section-4-5.22){.pilcrow}
:   

Request Nonce (12):
:   Retrieves a 96-bit nonce specific to the requesting remote address,
    which is valid for a limited period. Command data is not used in the
    request. The nonce consists of a 64-bit NTP timestamp and 32 bits of
    hash derived from that timestamp, the remote address, and salt known
    only to the server, which varies between daemon runs. Inclusion of
    the nonce by a management agent demonstrates to the server that the
    agent can receive datagrams sent to the source address of the
    request, making source address \"spoofing\" more difficult in a
    similar way as TCP\'s three-way
    handshake.[¶](#section-4-5.24){.pilcrow}
:   

Unset Trap (31):
:   Removes the requesting remote address and port from the list of trap
    receivers. Command data is not used in the request. If the address
    and port are not in the list of trap receivers, the error code is 4
    (bad association).[¶](#section-4-5.26){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#IANA}
::: {#section-5 .section}
## [5.](#section-5){.section-number .selfRef} [IANA Considerations](#name-iana-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-iana-considerations}

This document has no IANA actions.[¶](#section-5-1){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#Security}
::: {#section-6 .section}
## [6.](#section-6){.section-number .selfRef} [Security Considerations](#name-security-considerations){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-security-considerations}

A number of security vulnerabilities have been identified with these
control messages.[¶](#section-6-1){.pilcrow}

NTP\'s control query interface allows reading and writing of system,
peer, and clock variables remotely from arbitrary IP addresses using
commands mentioned in [Section 4](#commands){.auto .internal .xref}.
Overwriting these variables, but not reading them, requires
authentication by default. However, this document argues that an NTP
host must authenticate all control queries and not just ones that
overwrite these variables. Alternatively, the host can use an access
control list to explicitly list IP addresses that are allowed to control
query the clients. These access controls are required for the following
reasons:[¶](#section-6-2){.pilcrow}

[]{.break}

NTP as a Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) vector:
:   NTP timing query and response packets (modes 1-2, 3-4, and 5) are
    usually short in size. However, some NTP control queries generate a
    very long packet in response to a short query. As such, there is a
    history of use of NTP\'s control queries, which exhibit such
    behavior, to perform DoS attacks. These off-path attacks exploit the
    large size of NTP control queries to cause UDP-based amplification
    attacks (e.g., mode 7 monlist command generates a very long packet
    in response to a small query \[[CVE-DOS](#CVE-DOS){.cite .xref}\]).
    These attacks only use NTP as a vector for DoS attacks on other
    protocols, but do not affect the time service on the NTP host
    itself. To limit the sources of these malicious commands, NTP server
    operators are recommended to deploy ingress filtering
    \[[RFC3704](#RFC3704){.cite .xref}\].[¶](#section-6-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Time-shifting attacks through information leakage/overwriting:
:   NTP hosts save important system and peer state variables. An
    off-path attacker who can read these variables remotely can leverage
    the information leaked by these control queries to perform
    time-shifting and DDoS attacks on NTP clients. These attacks do
    affect time synchronization on the NTP hosts. For
    instance:[¶](#section-6-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

-   [In the client/server mode, the client stores its local time when it
    sends the query to the server in its xmt peer variable. This
    variable is used to perform TEST2 to non-cryptographically
    authenticate the server (i.e., if the origin timestamp field in the
    corresponding server response packet matches the xmt peer variable,
    then the client accepts the packet). An off-path attacker with the
    ability to read this variable can easily spoof server response
    packets for the client, which will pass TEST2 and can deny service
    or shift time on the NTP client. The specific attack is described in
    \[[CVE-SPOOF](#CVE-SPOOF){.cite
    .xref}\].[¶](#section-6-4.1){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-4.1}
-   [The client also stores its local time when the server response is
    received in its rec peer variable. This variable is used for
    authentication in interleaved-pivot mode. An off-path attacker with
    the ability to read this state variable can easily shift time on the
    client by passing this test. This attack is described in
    \[[CVE-SHIFT](#CVE-SHIFT){.cite
    .xref}\].[¶](#section-6-4.2){.pilcrow}]{#section-6-4.2}

[]{.break}

Fast-Scanning:
:   NTP mode 6 control messages are usually small UDP packets.
    Fast-scanning tools like ZMap can be used to spray the entire
    (potentially reachable) Internet with these messages within hours to
    identify vulnerable hosts. To make things worse, these attacks can
    be extremely low-rate, only requiring a control query for
    reconnaissance and a spoofed response to shift time on vulnerable
    clients.[¶](#section-6-5.2){.pilcrow}
:   

The mode 6 and 7 messages are vulnerable to replay attacks \[[CVE-Replay](#CVE-Replay){.cite .xref}\]:
:   If an attacker observes mode 6/7 packets that modify the
    configuration of the server in any way, the attacker can apply the
    same change at any time later by simply sending the packets to the
    server again. The use of the nonce (Request Nonce command) provides
    limited protection against replay
    attacks.[¶](#section-6-5.4){.pilcrow}
:   

NTP best practices recommend configuring NTP with the no-query
parameter. The no-query parameter blocks access to all remote control
queries. However, sometimes the hosts do not want to block all queries
and want to give access for certain control queries remotely. This could
be for the purpose of remote management and configuration of the hosts
in certain scenarios. Such hosts tend to use firewalls or other
middleboxes to blacklist certain queries within the
network.[¶](#section-6-6){.pilcrow}

Significantly fewer hosts respond to mode 7 monlist queries as compared
to other control queries because it is a well-known and exploited
control query. These queries are likely blocked using blacklists on
firewalls and middleboxes rather than the no-query option on NTP hosts.
The remaining control queries that can be exploited likely remain out of
the blacklist because they are undocumented in the current NTP
specification \[[RFC5905](#RFC5905){.cite
.xref}\].[¶](#section-6-7){.pilcrow}

This document describes all of the mode 6 control queries allowed by NTP
and can help administrators make informed decisions on security measures
to protect NTP devices from harmful queries and likely make those
systems less vulnerable. The use of the legacy mode 6 interface is [NOT
RECOMMENDED]{.bcp14}. Regardless of which mode 6 commands an
administrator may elect to allow, remote access to this facility needs
to be protected from unauthorized access (e.g., strict Access Control
Lists (ACLs)). Additionally, the legacy interface for mode 6 commands
[SHOULD NOT]{.bcp14} be utilized in new deployments or implementation of
NTP.[¶](#section-6-8){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#section-7 .section}
## [7.](#section-7){.section-number .selfRef} [References](#name-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-references}

::: {#section-7.1 .section}
### [7.1.](#section-7.1){.section-number .selfRef} [Normative References](#name-normative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-normative-references}

\[RFC1305\]
:   [Mills, D.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Network Time Protocol (Version 3)
    Specification, Implementation and Analysis\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC
    1305]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC1305]{.seriesInfo}, March 1992,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1305>\>.
:   

\[RFC2119\]
:   [Bradner, S.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    2119]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC2119]{.seriesInfo}, March 1997,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>\>.
:   

\[RFC3704\]
:   [Baker, F.]{.refAuthor} and [P. Savola]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ingress
    Filtering for Multihomed Networks\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP
    84]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 3704]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC3704]{.seriesInfo}, March 2004,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3704>\>.
:   

\[RFC5905\]
:   [Mills, D.]{.refAuthor}, [Martin, J., Ed.]{.refAuthor},
    [Burbank, J.]{.refAuthor}, and [W. Kasch]{.refAuthor}, [\"Network
    Time Protocol Version 4: Protocol and Algorithms
    Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [RFC 5905]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC5905]{.seriesInfo}, June 2010,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5905>\>.
:   

\[RFC5952\]
:   [Kawamura, S.]{.refAuthor} and [M. Kawashima]{.refAuthor}, [\"A
    Recommendation for IPv6 Address Text Representation\"]{.refTitle},
    [RFC 5952]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC5952]{.seriesInfo}, August
    2010, \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5952>\>.
:   

\[RFC8174\]
:   [Leiba, B.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
    RFC 2119 Key Words\"]{.refTitle}, [BCP 14]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC
    8174]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI 10.17487/RFC8174]{.seriesInfo}, May 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>\>.
:   
:::

::: {#section-7.2 .section}
### [7.2.](#section-7.2){.section-number .selfRef} [Informative References](#name-informative-references){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-informative-references}

\[CVE-DOS\]
:   [NIST National Vulnerability Database]{.refAuthor}, [\"CVE-2013-5211
    Detail\"]{.refTitle}, 2 January 2014,
    \<<https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2013-5211>\>.
:   

\[CVE-Replay\]
:   [NIST National Vulnerability Database]{.refAuthor}, [\"CVE-2015-8140
    Detail\"]{.refTitle}, 30 January 2015,
    \<<https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2015-8140>\>.
:   

\[CVE-SHIFT\]
:   [NIST National Vulnerability Database]{.refAuthor}, [\"CVE-2016-1548
    Detail\"]{.refTitle}, 6 January 2017,
    \<<https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2016-1548>\>.
:   

\[CVE-SPOOF\]
:   [NIST National Vulnerability Database]{.refAuthor}, [\"CVE-2015-8139
    Detail\"]{.refTitle}, 30 January 2017,
    \<<https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2015-8139>\>.
:   

\[RFC0791\]
:   [Postel, J.]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet Protocol\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    5]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 791]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC0791]{.seriesInfo}, September 1981,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc791>\>.
:   

\[RFC8200\]
:   [Deering, S.]{.refAuthor} and [R. Hinden]{.refAuthor}, [\"Internet
    Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification\"]{.refTitle}, [STD
    86]{.seriesInfo}, [RFC 8200]{.seriesInfo}, [DOI
    10.17487/RFC8200]{.seriesInfo}, July 2017,
    \<<https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200>\>.
:   
:::
:::

::: {#mode7}
::: {#appendix-A .section}
## [Appendix A.](#appendix-A){.section-number .selfRef} [NTP Remote Facility Message Format](#name-ntp-remote-facility-message){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-ntp-remote-facility-message}

The format of the NTP Remote Facility Message header, which immediately
follows the UDP header, is shown in [Figure 3](#M7Hdr){.auto .internal
.xref}. A description of its fields follows [Figure 3](#M7Hdr){.auto
.internal .xref}. Bit positions marked as zero are reserved and should
always be transmitted as zero.[¶](#appendix-A-1){.pilcrow}

[]{#name-ntp-remote-facility-message-}

::: {#M7Hdr}
::: {#appendix-A-2.1 .alignCenter .art-text .artwork}
     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |R|M| VN  |Mode |A|  Sequence   | Implementation|   Req Code    |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |  Err  |        Count          |  MBZ  |       Size            |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                                                               |
    /                    Data (up to 500 bytes)                     /
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                Encryption KeyID (when A bit set)              |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                                                               |
    /          Message Authentication Code (when A bit set)         /
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
:::

[Figure 3](#figure-3){.selfRef}: [NTP Remote Facility Message
Header](#name-ntp-remote-facility-message-){.selfRef}
:::

[]{.break}

Response Bit (R):
:   Set to 0 if the packet is a request. Set to 1 if the packet is a
    response.[¶](#appendix-A-3.2){.pilcrow}
:   

More Bit (M):
:   Set to 0 if this is the last packet in a response; otherwise, set to
    1 in responses requiring more than one
    packet.[¶](#appendix-A-3.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Version Number (VN):
:   Set to the version number of the NTP
    daemon.[¶](#appendix-A-3.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Mode:
:   Set to 7 for Remote Facility messages.[¶](#appendix-A-3.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Authenticated Bit (A):
:   If set to 1, this packet contains authentication
    information.[¶](#appendix-A-3.10){.pilcrow}
:   

Sequence:
:   For a multi-packet response, this field contains the sequence number
    of this packet. Packets in a multi-packet response are numbered
    starting with 0. The More Bit is set to 1 for all packets but the
    last.[¶](#appendix-A-3.12){.pilcrow}
:   

Implementation:
:   The version number of the implementation that defined the request
    code used in this message. An implementation number of 0 is used for
    a request code supported by all versions of the NTP daemon. The
    value 255 is reserved for future
    extensions.[¶](#appendix-A-3.14){.pilcrow}
:   

Request Code (Req Code):
:   An implementation-specific code that specifies the operation being
    requested. A request code definition includes the format and
    semantics of the data included in the
    packet.[¶](#appendix-A-3.16){.pilcrow}
:   

Error (Err):

:   Set to 0 for a request. For a response, this field contains an error
    code relating to the request. If the Error is nonzero, the operation
    requested wasn\'t performed.[¶](#appendix-A-3.18.1){.pilcrow}

    []{.break}

    0:
    :   no error[¶](#appendix-A-3.18.2.2){.pilcrow}
    :   

    1:
    :   incompatible implementation
        number[¶](#appendix-A-3.18.2.4){.pilcrow}
    :   

    2:
    :   unimplemented request code[¶](#appendix-A-3.18.2.6){.pilcrow}
    :   

    3:
    :   format error[¶](#appendix-A-3.18.2.8){.pilcrow}
    :   

    4:
    :   no data available[¶](#appendix-A-3.18.2.10){.pilcrow}
    :   

    7:
    :   authentication failure[¶](#appendix-A-3.18.2.12){.pilcrow}
    :   

:   

[]{.break}

Count:
:   The number of data items in the packet. Range is 0 to
    500.[¶](#appendix-A-4.2){.pilcrow}
:   

Must Be Zero (MBZ):
:   A reserved field set to 0 in requests and
    responses.[¶](#appendix-A-4.4){.pilcrow}
:   

Size:
:   The size of each data item in the packet. Range is 0 to
    500.[¶](#appendix-A-4.6){.pilcrow}
:   

Data:
:   A variable-sized field containing request/response data. For
    requests and responses, the size in octets must be greater than or
    equal to the product of the number of data items (Count) and the
    size of a data item (Size). For requests, the data area is exactly
    40 octets in length. For responses, the data area will range from 0
    to 500 octets, inclusive.[¶](#appendix-A-4.8){.pilcrow}
:   

Encryption KeyID:
:   A 32-bit unsigned integer used to designate the key used for the
    Message Authentication Code. This field is included only when the A
    bit is set to 1.[¶](#appendix-A-4.10){.pilcrow}
:   

Message Authentication Code:
:   An optional Message Authentication Code defined by the version of
    the NTP daemon indicated in the Implementation field. This field is
    included only when the A bit is set to
    1.[¶](#appendix-A-4.12){.pilcrow}
:   
:::
:::

::: {#Acknowledgements}
::: {#appendix-B .section}
## [Acknowledgements](#name-acknowledgements){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-acknowledgements}

[Tim Plunkett]{.contact-name} created the original version of this
document. [Aanchal Malhotra]{.contact-name} provided the initial version
of the Security Considerations section.[¶](#appendix-B-1){.pilcrow}

[Karen O\'Donoghue]{.contact-name}, [David Hart]{.contact-name}, [Harlan
Stenn]{.contact-name}, and [Philip Chimento]{.contact-name} deserve
credit for portions of this document due to their earlier efforts to
document these commands.[¶](#appendix-B-2){.pilcrow}

[Miroshav Lichvar]{.contact-name}, [Ulrich Windl]{.contact-name},
[Dieter Sibold]{.contact-name}, [J Ignacio
Alvarez-Hamelin]{.contact-name}, and [Alex Campbell]{.contact-name}
provided valuable comments on various draft versions of this
document.[¶](#appendix-B-3){.pilcrow}
:::
:::

::: {#appendix-C .section}
## [Contributors](#name-contributors){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-contributors}

Dr. [David Mills]{.contact-name} specified the vast majority of the mode
6 commands during the development of \[[RFC1305](#RFC1305){.cite
.xref}\] and deserves the credit for their existence and
use.[¶](#appendix-C-1){.pilcrow}
:::

::: {#authors-addresses}
::: {#appendix-D .section}
## [Author\'s Address](#name-authors-address){.section-name .selfRef} {#name-authors-address}

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[Brian Haberman ([editor]{.role})]{.fn .nameRole}
:::

::: {.left dir="auto"}
[JHU]{.org}
:::

::: email
Email: <brian@innovationslab.net>
:::
:::
:::
